<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>X.</h3>

<p>
The prince did not die before his wedding—either by day or night, as he
had foretold that he might. Very probably he passed disturbed nights, and was
afflicted with bad dreams; but, during the daytime, among his fellow-men, he
seemed as kind as ever, and even contented; only a little thoughtful when
alone.
</p>

<p>
The wedding was hurried on. The day was fixed for exactly a week after
Evgenie’s visit to the prince. In the face of such haste as this, even
the prince’s best friends (if he had had any) would have felt the
hopelessness of any attempt to save “the poor madman.” Rumour said
that in the visit of Evgenie Pavlovitch was to be discerned the influence of
Lizabetha Prokofievna and her husband... But if those good souls, in the
boundless kindness of their hearts, were desirous of saving the eccentric young
fellow from ruin, they were unable to take any stronger measures to attain that
end. Neither their position, nor their private inclination, perhaps (and only
naturally), would allow them to use any more pronounced means.
</p>

<p>
We have observed before that even some of the prince’s nearest neighbours
had begun to oppose him. Vera Lebedeff’s passive disagreement was limited
to the shedding of a few solitary tears; to more frequent sitting alone at
home, and to a diminished frequency in her visits to the prince’s
apartments.
</p>

<p>
Colia was occupied with his father at this time. The old man died during a
second stroke, which took place just eight days after the first. The prince
showed great sympathy in the grief of the family, and during the first days of
their mourning he was at the house a great deal with Nina Alexandrovna. He went
to the funeral, and it was observable that the public assembled in church
greeted his arrival and departure with whisperings, and watched him closely.
</p>

<p>
The same thing happened in the park and in the street, wherever he went. He was
pointed out when he drove by, and he often overheard the name of Nastasia
Philipovna coupled with his own as he passed. People looked out for her at the
funeral, too, but she was not there; and another conspicuous absentee was the
captain’s widow, whom Lebedeff had prevented from coming.
</p>

<p>
The funeral service produced a great effect on the prince. He whispered to
Lebedeff that this was the first time he had ever heard a Russian funeral
service since he was a little boy. Observing that he was looking about him
uneasily, Lebedeff asked him whom he was seeking.
</p>

<p>
“Nothing. I only thought I—”
</p>

<p>
“Is it Rogojin?”
</p>

<p>
“Why—is he here?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, he’s in church.”
</p>

<p>
“I thought I caught sight of his eyes!” muttered the prince, in
confusion. “But what of it!—Why is he here? Was he asked?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, dear, no! Why, they don’t even know him! Anyone can come in,
you know. Why do you look so amazed? I often meet him; I’ve seen him at
least four times, here at Pavlofsk, within the last week.”
</p>

<p>
“I haven’t seen him once—since that day!” the prince
murmured.
</p>

<p>
As Nastasia Philipovna had not said a word about having met Rogojin since
“that day,” the prince concluded that the latter had his own
reasons for wishing to keep out of sight. All the day of the funeral our hero
was in a deeply thoughtful state, while Nastasia Philipovna was particularly
merry, both in the daytime and in the evening.
</p>

<p>
Colia had made it up with the prince before his father’s death, and it
was he who urged him to make use of Keller and Burdovsky, promising to answer
himself for the former’s behaviour. Nina Alexandrovna and Lebedeff tried
to persuade him to have the wedding in St. Petersburg, instead of in the public
fashion contemplated, down here at Pavlofsk in the height of the season. But
the prince only said that Nastasia Philipovna desired to have it so, though he
saw well enough what prompted their arguments.
</p>

<p>
The next day Keller came to visit the prince. He was in a high state of delight
with the post of honour assigned to him at the wedding.
</p>

<p>
Before entering he stopped on the threshold, raised his hand as if making a
solemn vow, and cried:
</p>

<p>
“I won’t drink!”
</p>

<p>
Then he went up to the prince, seized both his hands, shook them warmly, and
declared that he had at first felt hostile towards the project of this
marriage, and had openly said so in the billiard-rooms, but that the reason
simply was that, with the impatience of a friend, he had hoped to see the
prince marry at least a Princess de Rohan or de Chabot; but that now he saw
that the prince’s way of thinking was ten times more noble than that of
“all the rest put together.” For he desired neither pomp nor wealth
nor honour, but only the truth! The sympathies of exalted personages were well
known, and the prince was too highly placed by his education, and so on, not to
be in some sense an exalted personage!
</p>

<p>
“But all the common herd judge differently; in the town, at the meetings,
in the villas, at the band, in the inns and the billiard-rooms, the coming
event has only to be mentioned and there are shouts and cries from everybody. I
have even heard talk of getting up a ‘charivari’ under the windows
on the wedding-night. So if ‘you have need of the pistol’ of an
honest man, prince, I am ready to fire half a dozen shots even before you rise
from your nuptial couch!”
</p>

<p>
Keller also advised, in anticipation of the crowd making a rush after the
ceremony, that a fire-hose should be placed at the entrance to the house; but
Lebedeff was opposed to this measure, which he said might result in the place
being pulled down.
</p>

<p>
“I assure you, prince, that Lebedeff is intriguing against you. He wants
to put you under control. Imagine that! To take ‘from you the use of your
free-will and your money’—that is to say, the two things that
distinguish us from the animals! I have heard it said positively. It is the
sober truth.”
</p>

<p>
The prince recollected that somebody had told him something of the kind before,
and he had, of course, scoffed at it. He only laughed now, and forgot the hint
at once.
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff really had been busy for some little while; but, as usual, his plans
had become too complex to succeed, through sheer excess of ardour. When he came
to the prince—the very day before the wedding—to confess (for he
always confessed to the persons against whom he intrigued, especially when the
plan failed), he informed our hero that he himself was a born Talleyrand, but
for some unknown reason had become simple Lebedeff. He then proceeded to
explain his whole game to the prince, interesting the latter exceedingly.
</p>

<p>
According to Lebedeff’s account, he had first tried what he could do with
General Epanchin. The latter informed him that he wished well to the
unfortunate young man, and would gladly do what he could to “save
him,” but that he did not think it would be seemly for him to interfere
in this matter. Lizabetha Prokofievna would neither hear nor see him. Prince S.
and Evgenie Pavlovitch only shrugged their shoulders, and implied that it was
no business of theirs. However, Lebedeff had not lost heart, and went off to a
clever lawyer,—a worthy and respectable man, whom he knew well. This old
gentleman informed him that the thing was perfectly feasible if he could get
hold of competent witnesses as to Muishkin’s mental incapacity. Then,
with the assistance of a few influential persons, he would soon see the matter
arranged.
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff immediately procured the services of an old doctor, and carried the
latter away to Pavlofsk to see the prince, by way of viewing the ground, as it
were, and to give him (Lebedeff) counsel as to whether the thing was to be done
or not. The visit was not to be official, but merely friendly.
</p>

<p>
Muishkin remembered the doctor’s visit quite well. He remembered that
Lebedeff had said that he looked ill, and had better see a doctor; and although
the prince scouted the idea, Lebedeff had turned up almost immediately with his
old friend, explaining that they had just met at the bedside of Hippolyte, who
was very ill, and that the doctor had something to tell the prince about the
sick man.
</p>

<p>
The prince had, of course, at once received him, and had plunged into a
conversation about Hippolyte. He had given the doctor an account of
Hippolyte’s attempted suicide; and had proceeded thereafter to talk of
his own malady,—of Switzerland, of Schneider, and so on; and so deeply
was the old man interested by the prince’s conversation and his
description of Schneider’s system, that he sat on for two hours.
</p>

<p>
Muishkin gave him excellent cigars to smoke, and Lebedeff, for his part,
regaled him with liqueurs, brought in by Vera, to whom the doctor—a
married man and the father of a family—addressed such compliments that
she was filled with indignation. They parted friends, and, after leaving the
prince, the doctor said to Lebedeff: “If all such people were put under
restraint, there would be no one left for keepers.” Lebedeff then, in
tragic tones, told of the approaching marriage, whereupon the other nodded his
head and replied that, after all, marriages like that were not so rare; that he
had heard that the lady was very fascinating and of extraordinary beauty, which
was enough to explain the infatuation of a wealthy man; that, further, thanks
to the liberality of Totski and of Rogojin, she possessed—so he had
heard—not only money, but pearls, diamonds, shawls, and furniture, and
consequently she could not be considered a bad match. In brief, it seemed to
the doctor that the prince’s choice, far from being a sign of
foolishness, denoted, on the contrary, a shrewd, calculating, and practical
mind. Lebedeff had been much struck by this point of view, and he terminated
his confession by assuring the prince that he was ready, if need be, to shed
his very life’s blood for him.
</p>

<p>
Hippolyte, too, was a source of some distraction to the prince at this time; he
would send for him at any and every hour of the day. They
lived,—Hippolyte and his mother and the children,—in a small house
not far off, and the little ones were happy, if only because they were able to
escape from the invalid into the garden. The prince had enough to do in keeping
the peace between the irritable Hippolyte and his mother, and eventually the
former became so malicious and sarcastic on the subject of the approaching
wedding, that Muishkin took offence at last, and refused to continue his
visits.
</p>

<p>
A couple of days later, however, Hippolyte’s mother came with tears in
her eyes, and begged the prince to come back, “or <i>he</i> would eat her
up bodily.” She added that Hippolyte had a great secret to disclose. Of
course the prince went. There was no secret, however, unless we reckon certain
pantings and agitated glances around (probably all put on) as the invalid
begged his visitor to “beware of Rogojin.”
</p>

<p>
“He is the sort of man,” he continued, “who won’t give
up his object, you know; he is not like you and me, prince—he belongs to
quite a different order of beings. If he sets his heart on a thing he
won’t be afraid of anything—” and so on.
</p>

<p>
Hippolyte was very ill, and looked as though he could not long survive. He was
tearful at first, but grew more and more sarcastic and malicious as the
interview proceeded.
</p>

<p>
The prince questioned him in detail as to his hints about Rogojin. He was
anxious to seize upon some facts which might confirm Hippolyte’s vague
warnings; but there were none; only Hippolyte’s own private impressions
and feelings.
</p>

<p>
However, the invalid—to his immense satisfaction—ended by seriously
alarming the prince.
</p>

<p>
At first Muishkin had not cared to make any reply to his sundry questions, and
only smiled in response to Hippolyte’s advice to “run for his
life—abroad, if necessary. There are Russian priests everywhere, and one
can get married all over the world.”
</p>

<p>
But it was Hippolyte’s last idea which upset him.
</p>

<p>
“What I am really alarmed about, though,” he said, “is Aglaya
Ivanovna. Rogojin knows how you love her. Love for love. You took Nastasia
Philipovna from him. He will murder Aglaya Ivanovna; for though she is not
yours, of course, now, still such an act would pain you,—wouldn’t
it?”
</p>

<p>
He had attained his end. The prince left the house beside himself with terror.
</p>

<p>
These warnings about Rogojin were expressed on the day before the wedding. That
evening the prince saw Nastasia Philipovna for the last time before they were
to meet at the altar; but Nastasia was not in a position to give him any
comfort or consolation. On the contrary, she only added to his mental
perturbation as the evening went on. Up to this time she had invariably done
her best to cheer him—she was afraid of his looking melancholy; she would
try singing to him, and telling him every sort of funny story or reminiscence
that she could recall. The prince nearly always pretended to be amused, whether
he were so actually or no; but often enough he laughed sincerely, delighted by
the brilliancy of her wit when she was carried away by her narrative, as she
very often was. Nastasia would be wild with joy to see the impression she had
made, and to hear his laugh of real amusement; and she would remain the whole
evening in a state of pride and happiness. But this evening her melancholy and
thoughtfulness grew with every hour.
</p>

<p>
The prince had told Evgenie Pavlovitch with perfect sincerity that he loved
Nastasia Philipovna with all his soul. In his love for her there was the sort
of tenderness one feels for a sick, unhappy child which cannot be left alone.
He never spoke of his feelings for Nastasia to anyone, not even to herself.
When they were together they never discussed their “feelings,” and
there was nothing in their cheerful, animated conversation which an outsider
could not have heard. Daria Alexeyevna, with whom Nastasia was staying, told
afterwards how she had been filled with joy and delight only to look at them,
all this time.
</p>

<p>
Thanks to the manner in which he regarded Nastasia’s mental and moral
condition, the prince was to some extent freed from other perplexities. She was
now quite different from the woman he had known three months before. He was not
astonished, for instance, to see her now so impatient to marry him—she
who formerly had wept with rage and hurled curses and reproaches at him if he
mentioned marriage! “It shows that she no longer fears, as she did then,
that she would make me unhappy by marrying me,” he thought. And he felt
sure that so sudden a change could not be a natural one. This rapid growth of
self-confidence could not be due only to her hatred for Aglaya. To suppose that
would be to suspect the depth of her feelings. Nor could it arise from dread of
the fate that awaited her if she married Rogojin. These causes, indeed, as well
as others, might have played a part in it, but the true reason, Muishkin
decided, was the one he had long suspected—that the poor sick soul had
come to the end of its forces. Yet this was an explanation that did not procure
him any peace of mind. At times he seemed to be making violent efforts to think
of nothing, and one would have said that he looked on his marriage as an
unimportant formality, and on his future happiness as a thing not worth
considering. As to conversations such as the one held with Evgenie Pavlovitch,
he avoided them as far as possible, feeling that there were certain objections
to which he could make no answer.
</p>

<p>
The prince had observed that Nastasia knew well enough what Aglaya was to him.
He never spoke of it, but he had seen her face when she had caught him starting
off for the Epanchins’ house on several occasions. When the Epanchins
left Pavlofsk, she had beamed with radiance and happiness. Unsuspicious and
unobservant as he was, he had feared at that time that Nastasia might have some
scheme in her mind for a scene or scandal which would drive Aglaya out of
Pavlofsk. She had encouraged the rumours and excitement among the inhabitants
of the place as to her marriage with the prince, in order to annoy her rival;
and, finding it difficult to meet the Epanchins anywhere, she had, on one
occasion, taken him for a drive past their house. He did not observe what was
happening until they were almost passing the windows, when it was too late to
do anything. He said nothing, but for two days afterwards he was ill.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia did not try that particular experiment again. A few days before that
fixed for the wedding, she grew grave and thoughtful. She always ended by
getting the better of her melancholy, and becoming merry and cheerful again,
but not quite so unaffectedly happy as she had been some days earlier.
</p>

<p>
The prince redoubled his attentive study of her symptoms. It was a most curious
circumstance, in his opinion, that she never spoke of Rogojin. But once, about
five days before the wedding, when the prince was at home, a messenger arrived
begging him to come at once, as Nastasia Philipovna was very ill.
</p>

<p>
He had found her in a condition approaching to absolute madness. She screamed,
and trembled, and cried out that Rogojin was hiding out there in the
garden—that she had seen him herself—and that he would murder her
in the night—that he would cut her throat. She was terribly agitated all
day. But it so happened that the prince called at Hippolyte’s house later
on, and heard from his mother that she had been in town all day, and had there
received a visit from Rogojin, who had made inquiries about Pavlofsk. On
inquiry, it turned out that Rogojin visited the old lady in town at almost the
same moment when Nastasia declared that she had seen him in the garden; so that
the whole thing turned out to be an illusion on her part. Nastasia immediately
went across to Hippolyte’s to inquire more accurately, and returned
immensely relieved and comforted.
</p>

<p>
On the day before the wedding, the prince left Nastasia in a state of great
animation. Her wedding-dress and all sorts of finery had just arrived from
town. Muishkin had not imagined that she would be so excited over it, but he
praised everything, and his praise rendered her doubly happy.
</p>

<p>
But Nastasia could not hide the cause of her intense interest in her wedding
splendour. She had heard of the indignation in the town, and knew that some of
the populace was getting up a sort of charivari with music, that verses had
been composed for the occasion, and that the rest of Pavlofsk society more or
less encouraged these preparations. So, since attempts were being made to
humiliate her, she wanted to hold her head even higher than usual, and to
overwhelm them all with the beauty and taste of her toilette. “Let them
shout and whistle, if they dare!” Her eyes flashed at the thought. But,
underneath this, she had another motive, of which she did not speak. She
thought that possibly Aglaya, or at any rate someone sent by her, would be
present incognito at the ceremony, or in the crowd, and she wished to be
prepared for this eventuality.
</p>

<p>
The prince left her at eleven, full of these thoughts, and went home. But it
was not twelve o’clock when a messenger came to say that Nastasia was
very bad, and he must come at once.
</p>

<p>
On hurrying back he found his bride locked up in her own room and could hear
her hysterical cries and sobs. It was some time before she could be made to
hear that the prince had come, and then she opened the door only just
sufficiently to let him in, and immediately locked it behind him. She then fell
on her knees at his feet. (So at least Dana Alexeyevna reported.)
</p>

<p>
“What am I doing? What am I doing to you?” she sobbed convulsively,
embracing his knees.
</p>

<p>
The prince was a whole hour soothing and comforting her, and left her, at
length, pacified and composed. He sent another messenger during the night to
inquire after her, and two more next morning. The last brought back a message
that Nastasia was surrounded by a whole army of dressmakers and maids, and was
as happy and as busy as such a beauty should be on her wedding morning, and
that there was not a vestige of yesterday’s agitation remaining. The
message concluded with the news that at the moment of the bearer’s
departure there was a great confabulation in progress as to which diamonds were
to be worn, and how.
</p>

<p>
This message entirely calmed the prince’s mind.
</p>

<p>
The following report of the proceedings on the wedding day may be depended
upon, as coming from eye-witnesses.
</p>

<p>
The wedding was fixed for eight o’clock in the evening. Nastasia
Philipovna was ready at seven. From six o’clock groups of people began to
gather at Nastasia’s house, at the prince’s, and at the church
door, but more especially at the former place. The church began to fill at
seven.
</p>

<p>
Colia and Vera Lebedeff were very anxious on the prince’s account, but
they were so busy over the arrangements for receiving the guests after the
wedding, that they had not much time for the indulgence of personal feelings.
</p>

<p>
There were to be very few guests besides the best men and so on; only Dana
Alexeyevna, the Ptitsins, Gania, and the doctor. When the prince asked Lebedeff
why he had invited the doctor, who was almost a stranger, Lebedeff replied:
</p>

<p>
“Why, he wears an ‘order,’ and it looks so well!”
</p>

<p>
This idea amused the prince.
</p>

<p>
Keller and Burdovsky looked wonderfully correct in their dress-coats and white
kid gloves, although Keller caused the bridegroom some alarm by his
undisguisedly hostile glances at the gathering crowd of sight-seers outside.
</p>

<p>
At about half-past seven the prince started for the church in his carriage.
</p>

<p>
We may remark here that he seemed anxious not to omit a single one of the
recognized customs and traditions observed at weddings. He wished all to be
done as openly as possible, and “in due order.”
</p>

<p>
Arrived at the church, Muishkin, under Keller’s guidance, passed through
the crowd of spectators, amid continuous whispering and excited exclamations.
The prince stayed near the altar, while Keller made off once more to fetch the
bride.
</p>

<p>
On reaching the gate of Daria Alexeyevna’s house, Keller found a far
denser crowd than he had encountered at the prince’s. The remarks and
exclamations of the spectators here were of so irritating a nature that Keller
was very near making them a speech on the impropriety of their conduct, but was
luckily caught by Burdovsky, in the act of turning to address them, and hurried
indoors.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia Philipovna was ready. She rose from her seat, looked into the glass
and remarked, as Keller told the tale afterwards, that she was “as pale
as a corpse.” She then bent her head reverently, before the ikon in the
corner, and left the room.
</p>

<p>
A torrent of voices greeted her appearance at the front door. The crowd
whistled, clapped its hands, and laughed and shouted; but in a moment or two
isolated voices were distinguishable.
</p>

<p>
“What a beauty!” cried one.
</p>

<p>
“Well, she isn’t the first in the world, nor the last,” said
another.
</p>

<p>
“Marriage covers everything,” observed a third.
</p>

<p>
“I defy you to find another beauty like that,” said a fourth.
</p>

<p>
“She’s a real princess! I’d sell my soul for such a princess
as that!”
</p>

<p>
Nastasia came out of the house looking as white as any handkerchief; but her
large dark eyes shone upon the vulgar crowd like blazing coals. The
spectators’ cries were redoubled, and became more exultant and triumphant
every moment. The door of the carriage was open, and Keller had given his hand
to the bride to help her in, when suddenly with a loud cry she rushed from him,
straight into the surging crowd. Her friends about her were stupefied with
amazement; the crowd parted as she rushed through it, and suddenly, at a
distance of five or six yards from the carriage, appeared Rogojin. It was his
look that had caught her eyes.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia rushed to him like a madwoman, and seized both his hands.
</p>

<p>
“Save me!” she cried. “Take me away, anywhere you like,
quick!”
</p>

<p>
Rogojin seized her in his arms and almost carried her to the carriage. Then, in
a flash, he tore a hundred-rouble note out of his pocket and held it to the
coachman.
</p>

<p>
“To the station, quick! If you catch the train you shall have another.
Quick!”
</p>

<p>
He leaped into the carriage after Nastasia and banged the door. The coachman
did not hesitate a moment; he whipped up the horses, and they were off.
</p>

<p>
“One more second and I should have stopped him,” said Keller,
afterwards. In fact, he and Burdovsky jumped into another carriage and set off
in pursuit; but it struck them as they drove along that it was not much use
trying to bring Nastasia back by force.
</p>

<p>
“Besides,” said Burdovsky, “the prince would not like it,
would he?” So they gave up the pursuit.
</p>

<p>
Rogojin and Nastasia Philipovna reached the station just in time for the train.
As he jumped out of the carriage and was almost on the point of entering the
train, Rogojin accosted a young girl standing on the platform and wearing an
old-fashioned, but respectable-looking, black cloak and a silk handkerchief
over her head.
</p>

<p>
“Take fifty roubles for your cloak?” he shouted, holding the money
out to the girl. Before the astonished young woman could collect her scattered
senses, he pushed the money into her hand, seized the mantle, and threw it and
the handkerchief over Nastasia’s head and shoulders. The latter’s
wedding-array would have attracted too much attention, and it was not until
some time later that the girl understood why her old cloak and kerchief had
been bought at such a price.
</p>

<p>
The news of what had happened reached the church with extraordinary rapidity.
When Keller arrived, a host of people whom he did not know thronged around to
ask him questions. There was much excited talking, and shaking of heads, even
some laughter; but no one left the church, all being anxious to observe how the
now celebrated bridegroom would take the news. He grew very pale upon hearing
it, but took it quite quietly.
</p>

<p>
“I was afraid,” he muttered, scarcely audibly, “but I hardly
thought it would come to this.” Then after a short silence, he added:
“However, in her state, it is quite consistent with the natural order of
things.”
</p>

<p>
Even Keller admitted afterwards that this was “extraordinarily
philosophical” on the prince’s part. He left the church quite calm,
to all appearances, as many witnesses were found to declare afterwards. He
seemed anxious to reach home and be left alone as quickly as possible; but this
was not to be. He was accompanied by nearly all the invited guests, and besides
this, the house was almost besieged by excited bands of people, who insisted
upon being allowed to enter the verandah. The prince heard Keller and Lebedeff
remonstrating and quarrelling with these unknown individuals, and soon went out
himself. He approached the disturbers of his peace, requested courteously to be
told what was desired; then politely putting Lebedeff and Keller aside, he
addressed an old gentleman who was standing on the verandah steps at the head
of the band of would-be guests, and courteously requested him to honour him
with a visit. The old fellow was quite taken aback by this, but entered,
followed by a few more, who tried to appear at their ease. The rest remained
outside, and presently the whole crowd was censuring those who had accepted the
invitation. The prince offered seats to his strange visitors, tea was served,
and a general conversation sprang up. Everything was done most decorously, to
the considerable surprise of the intruders. A few tentative attempts were made
to turn the conversation to the events of the day, and a few indiscreet
questions were asked; but Muishkin replied to everybody with such simplicity
and good-humour, and at the same time with so much dignity, and showed such
confidence in the good breeding of his guests, that the indiscreet talkers were
quickly silenced. By degrees the conversation became almost serious. One
gentleman suddenly exclaimed, with great vehemence: “Whatever happens, I
shall not sell my property; I shall wait. Enterprise is better than money, and
there, sir, you have my whole system of economy, if you wish!” He
addressed the prince, who warmly commended his sentiments, though Lebedeff
whispered in his ear that this gentleman, who talked so much of his
“property,” had never had either house or home.
</p>

<p>
Nearly an hour passed thus, and when tea was over the visitors seemed to think
that it was time to go. As they went out, the doctor and the old gentleman bade
Muishkin a warm farewell, and all the rest took their leave with hearty
protestations of good-will, dropping remarks to the effect that “it was
no use worrying,” and that “perhaps all would turn out for the
best,” and so on. Some of the younger intruders would have asked for
champagne, but they were checked by the older ones. When all had departed,
Keller leaned over to Lebedeff, and said:
</p>

<p>
“With you and me there would have been a scene. We should have shouted
and fought, and called in the police. But he has simply made some new
friends—and such friends, too! I know them!”
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff, who was slightly intoxicated, answered with a sigh:
</p>

<p>
“Things are hidden from the wise and prudent, and revealed unto babes. I
have applied those words to him before, but now I add that God has preserved
the babe himself from the abyss, He and all His saints.”
</p>

<p>
At last, about half-past ten, the prince was left alone. His head ached. Colia
was the last to go, after having helped him to change his wedding clothes. They
parted on affectionate terms, and, without speaking of what had happened, Colia
promised to come very early the next day. He said later that the prince had
given no hint of his intentions when they said good-bye, but had hidden them
even from him. Soon there was hardly anyone left in the house. Burdovsky had
gone to see Hippolyte; Keller and Lebedeff had wandered off together somewhere.
</p>

<p>
Only Vera Lebedeff remained hurriedly rearranging the furniture in the rooms.
As she left the verandah, she glanced at the prince. He was seated at the
table, with both elbows upon it, and his head resting on his hands. She
approached him, and touched his shoulder gently. The prince started and looked
at her in perplexity; he seemed to be collecting his senses for a minute or so,
before he could remember where he was. As recollection dawned upon him, he
became violently agitated. All he did, however, was to ask Vera very earnestly
to knock at his door and awake him in time for the first train to Petersburg
next morning. Vera promised, and the prince entreated her not to tell anyone of
his intention. She promised this, too; and at last, when she had half-closed
the door, he called her back a third time, took her hands in his, kissed them,
then kissed her forehead, and in a rather peculiar manner said to her,
“Until tomorrow!”
</p>

<p>
Such was Vera’s story afterwards.
</p>

<p>
She went away in great anxiety about him, but when she saw him in the morning,
he seemed to be quite himself again, greeted her with a smile, and told her
that he would very likely be back by the evening. It appears that he did not
consider it necessary to inform anyone excepting Vera of his departure for
town.
</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
