<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>IX.</h3>

<p>
“You will not deny, I am sure,” said Gavrila Ardalionovitch,
turning to Burdovsky, who sat looking at him with wide-open eyes, perplexed and
astonished. “You will not deny, seriously, that you were born just two
years after your mother’s legal marriage to Mr. Burdovsky, your father.
Nothing would be easier than to prove the date of your birth from well-known
facts; we can only look on Mr. Keller’s version as a work of imagination,
and one, moreover, extremely offensive both to you and your mother. Of course
he distorted the truth in order to strengthen your claim, and to serve your
interests. Mr. Keller said that he previously consulted you about his article
in the paper, but did not read it to you as a whole. Certainly he could not
have read that passage...”
</p>

<p>
“As a matter of fact, I did not read it,” interrupted the boxer,
“but its contents had been given me on unimpeachable authority, and
I...”
</p>

<p>
“Excuse me, Mr. Keller,” interposed Gavrila Ardalionovitch.
“Allow me to speak. I assure you your article shall be mentioned in its
proper place, and you can then explain everything, but for the moment I would
rather not anticipate. Quite accidentally, with the help of my sister, Varvara
Ardalionovna Ptitsin, I obtained from one of her intimate friends, Madame
Zoubkoff, a letter written to her twenty-five years ago, by Nicolai Andreevitch
Pavlicheff, then abroad. After getting into communication with this lady, I
went by her advice to Timofei Fedorovitch Viazovkin, a retired colonel, and one
of Pavlicheff’s oldest friends. He gave me two more letters written by
the latter when he was still in foreign parts. These three documents, their
dates, and the facts mentioned in them, prove in the most undeniable manner,
that eighteen months before your birth, Nicolai Andreevitch went abroad, where
he remained for three consecutive years. Your mother, as you are well aware,
has never been out of Russia.... It is too late to read the letters now; I am
content to state the fact. But if you desire it, come to me tomorrow morning,
bring witnesses and writing experts with you, and I will prove the absolute
truth of my story. From that moment the question will be decided.”
</p>

<p>
These words caused a sensation among the listeners, and there was a general
movement of relief. Burdovsky got up abruptly.
</p>

<p>
“If that is true,” said he, “I have been deceived, grossly
deceived, but not by Tchebaroff: and for a long time past, a long time. I do
not wish for experts, not I, nor to go to see you. I believe you. I give it
up.... But I refuse the ten thousand roubles. Good-bye.”
</p>

<p>
“Wait five minutes more, Mr. Burdovsky,” said Gavrila
Ardalionovitch pleasantly. “I have more to say. Some rather curious and
important facts have come to light, and it is absolutely necessary, in my
opinion, that you should hear them. You will not regret, I fancy, to have the
whole matter thoroughly cleared up.”
</p>

<p>
Burdovsky silently resumed his seat, and bent his head as though in profound
thought. His friend, Lebedeff’s nephew, who had risen to accompany him,
also sat down again. He seemed much disappointed, though as self-confident as
ever. Hippolyte looked dejected and sulky, as well as surprised. He had just
been attacked by a violent fit of coughing, so that his handkerchief was
stained with blood. The boxer looked thoroughly frightened.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, Antip!” cried he in a miserable voice, “I did say to you
the other day—the day before yesterday—that perhaps you were not
really Pavlicheff’s son!”
</p>

<p>
There were sounds of half-smothered laughter at this.
</p>

<p>
“Now, that is a valuable piece of information, Mr. Keller,” replied
Gania. “However that may be, I have private information which convinces
me that Mr. Burdovsky, though doubtless aware of the date of his birth, knew
nothing at all about Pavlicheff’s sojourn abroad. Indeed, he passed the
greater part of his life out of Russia, returning at intervals for short
visits. The journey in question is in itself too unimportant for his friends to
recollect it after more than twenty years; and of course Mr. Burdovsky could
have known nothing about it, for he was not born. As the event has proved, it
was not impossible to find evidence of his absence, though I must confess that
chance has helped me in a quest which might very well have come to nothing. It
was really almost impossible for Burdovsky or Tchebaroff to discover these
facts, even if it had entered their heads to try. Naturally they never
dreamt...”
</p>

<p>
Here the voice of Hippolyte suddenly intervened.
</p>

<p>
“Allow me, Mr. Ivolgin,” he said irritably. “What is the good
of all this rigmarole? Pardon me. All is now clear, and we acknowledge the
truth of your main point. Why go into these tedious details? You wish perhaps
to boast of the cleverness of your investigation, to cry up your talents as
detective? Or perhaps your intention is to excuse Burdovsky, by proving that he
took up the matter in ignorance? Well, I consider that extremely impudent on
your part! You ought to know that Burdovsky has no need of being excused or
justified by you or anyone else! It is an insult! The affair is quite painful
enough for him without that. Will nothing make you understand?”
</p>

<p>
“Enough! enough! Mr. Terentieff,” interrupted Gania.
</p>

<p>
“Don’t excite yourself; you seem very ill, and I am sorry for that.
I am almost done, but there are a few facts to which I must briefly refer, as I
am convinced that they ought to be clearly explained once for all....” A
movement of impatience was noticed in his audience as he resumed: “I
merely wish to state, for the information of all concerned, that the reason for
Mr. Pavlicheff’s interest in your mother, Mr. Burdovsky, was simply that
she was the sister of a serf-girl with whom he was deeply in love in his youth,
and whom most certainly he would have married but for her sudden death. I have
proofs that this circumstance is almost, if not quite, forgotten. I may add
that when your mother was about ten years old, Pavlicheff took her under his
care, gave her a good education, and later, a considerable dowry. His relations
were alarmed, and feared he might go so far as to marry her, but she gave her
hand to a young land-surveyor named Burdovsky when she reached the age of
twenty. I can even say definitely that it was a marriage of affection. After
his wedding your father gave up his occupation as land-surveyor, and with his
wife’s dowry of fifteen thousand roubles went in for commercial
speculations. As he had had no experience, he was cheated on all sides, and
took to drink in order to forget his troubles. He shortened his life by his
excesses, and eight years after his marriage he died. Your mother says herself
that she was left in the direst poverty, and would have died of starvation had
it not been for Pavlicheff, who generously allowed her a yearly pension of six
hundred roubles. Many people recall his extreme fondness for you as a little
boy. Your mother confirms this, and agrees with others in thinking that he
loved you the more because you were a sickly child, stammering in your speech,
and almost deformed—for it is known that all his life Nicolai Andreevitch
had a partiality for unfortunates of every kind, especially children. In my
opinion this is most important. I may add that I discovered yet another fact,
the last on which I employed my detective powers. Seeing how fond Pavlicheff
was of you,—it was thanks to him you went to school, and also had the
advantage of special teachers—his relations and servants grew to believe
that you were his son, and that your father had been betrayed by his wife. I
may point out that this idea was only accredited generally during the last
years of Pavlicheff’s life, when his next-of-kin were trembling about the
succession, when the earlier story was quite forgotten, and when all
opportunity for discovering the truth had seemingly passed away. No doubt you,
Mr. Burdovsky, heard this conjecture, and did not hesitate to accept it as
true. I have had the honour of making your mother’s acquaintance, and I
find that she knows all about these reports. What she does not know is that
you, her son, should have listened to them so complaisantly. I found your
respected mother at Pskoff, ill and in deep poverty, as she has been ever since
the death of your benefactor. She told me with tears of gratitude how you had
supported her; she expects much of you, and believes fervently in your future
success...”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, this is unbearable!” said Lebedeff’s nephew impatiently.
“What is the good of all this romancing?”
</p>

<p>
“It is revolting and unseemly!” cried Hippolyte, jumping up in a
fury.
</p>

<p>
Burdovsky alone sat silent and motionless.
</p>

<p>
“What is the good of it?” repeated Gavrila Ardalionovitch, with
pretended surprise. “Well, firstly, because now perhaps Mr. Burdovsky is
quite convinced that Mr. Pavlicheff’s love for him came simply from
generosity of soul, and not from paternal duty. It was most necessary to
impress this fact upon his mind, considering that he approved of the article
written by Mr. Keller. I speak thus because I look on you, Mr. Burdovsky, as an
honourable man. Secondly, it appears that there was no intention of cheating in
this case, even on the part of Tchebaroff. I wish to say this quite plainly,
because the prince hinted a while ago that I too thought it an attempt at
robbery and extortion. On the contrary, everyone has been quite sincere in the
matter, and although Tchebaroff may be somewhat of a rogue, in this business he
has acted simply as any sharp lawyer would do under the circumstances. He
looked at it as a case that might bring him in a lot of money, and he did not
calculate badly; because on the one hand he speculated on the generosity of the
prince, and his gratitude to the late Mr. Pavlicheff, and on the other to his
chivalrous ideas as to the obligations of honour and conscience. As to Mr.
Burdovsky, allowing for his principles, we may acknowledge that he engaged in
the business with very little personal aim in view. At the instigation of
Tchebaroff and his other friends, he decided to make the attempt in the service
of truth, progress, and humanity. In short, the conclusion may be drawn that,
in spite of all appearances, Mr. Burdovsky is a man of irreproachable
character, and thus the prince can all the more readily offer him his
friendship, and the assistance of which he spoke just now...”
</p>

<p>
“Hush! hush! Gavrila Ardalionovitch!” cried Muishkin in dismay, but
it was too late.
</p>

<p>
“I said, and I have repeated it over and over again,” shouted
Burdovsky furiously, “that I did not want the money. I will not take
it... why...I will not... I am going away!”
</p>

<p>
He was rushing hurriedly from the terrace, when Lebedeff’s nephew seized
his arms, and said something to him in a low voice. Burdovsky turned quickly,
and drawing an addressed but unsealed envelope from his pocket, he threw it
down on a little table beside the prince.
</p>

<p>
“There’s the money!... How dare you?... The money!”
</p>

<p>
“Those are the two hundred and fifty roubles you dared to send him as a
charity, by the hands of Tchebaroff,” explained Doktorenko.
</p>

<p>
“The article in the newspaper put it at fifty!” cried Colia.
</p>

<p>
“I beg your pardon,” said the prince, going up to Burdovsky.
“I have done you a great wrong, but I did not send you that money as a
charity, believe me. And now I am again to blame. I offended you just
now.” (The prince was much distressed; he seemed worn out with fatigue,
and spoke almost incoherently.) “I spoke of swindling... but I did not
apply that to you. I was deceived .... I said you were... afflicted... like
me... But you are not like me... you give lessons... you support your mother. I
said you had dishonoured your mother, but you love her. She says so herself...
I did not know... Gavrila Ardalionovitch did not tell me that... Forgive me! I
dared to offer you ten thousand roubles, but I was wrong. I ought to have done
it differently, and now... there is no way of doing it, for you despise
me...”
</p>

<p>
“I declare, this is a lunatic asylum!” cried Lizabetha Prokofievna.
</p>

<p>
“Of course it is a lunatic asylum!” repeated Aglaya sharply, but
her words were overpowered by other voices. Everybody was talking loudly,
making remarks and comments; some discussed the affair gravely, others laughed.
Ivan Fedorovitch Epanchin was extremely indignant. He stood waiting for his
wife with an air of offended dignity. Lebedeff’s nephew took up the word
again.
</p>

<p>
“Well, prince, to do you justice, you certainly know how to make the most
of your—let us call it infirmity, for the sake of politeness; you have
set about offering your money and friendship in such a way that no
self-respecting man could possibly accept them. This is an excess of
ingenuousness or of malice—you ought to know better than anyone which
word best fits the case.”
</p>

<p>
“Allow me, gentlemen,” said Gavrila Ardalionovitch, who had just
examined the contents of the envelope, “there are only a hundred roubles
here, not two hundred and fifty. I point this out, prince, to prevent
misunderstanding.”
</p>

<p>
“Never mind, never mind,” said the prince, signing to him to keep
quiet.
</p>

<p>
“But we do mind,” said Lebedeff’s nephew vehemently.
“Prince, your ‘never mind’ is an insult to us. We have
nothing to hide; our actions can bear daylight. It is true that there are only
a hundred roubles instead of two hundred and fifty, but it is all the
same.”
</p>

<p>
“Why, no, it is hardly the same,” remarked Gavrila Ardalionovitch,
with an air of ingenuous surprise.
</p>

<p>
“Don’t interrupt, we are not such fools as you think, Mr.
Lawyer,” cried Lebedeff’s nephew angrily. “Of course there is
a difference between a hundred roubles and two hundred and fifty, but in this
case the principle is the main point, and that a hundred and fifty roubles are
missing is only a side issue. The point to be emphasized is that Burdovsky will
not accept your highness’s charity; he flings it back in your face, and
it scarcely matters if there are a hundred roubles or two hundred and fifty.
Burdovsky has refused ten thousand roubles; you heard him. He would not have
returned even a hundred roubles if he was dishonest! The hundred and fifty
roubles were paid to Tchebaroff for his travelling expenses. You may jeer at
our stupidity and at our inexperience in business matters; you have done all
you could already to make us look ridiculous; but do not dare to call us
dishonest. The four of us will club together every day to repay the hundred and
fifty roubles to the prince, if we have to pay it in instalments of a rouble at
a time, but we will repay it, with interest. Burdovsky is poor, he has no
millions. After his journey to see the prince Tchebaroff sent in his bill. We
counted on winning... Who would not have done the same in such a case?”
</p>

<p>
“Who indeed?” exclaimed Prince S.
</p>

<p>
“I shall certainly go mad, if I stay here!” cried Lizabetha
Prokofievna.
</p>

<p>
“It reminds me,” said Evgenie Pavlovitch, laughing, “of the
famous plea of a certain lawyer who lately defended a man for murdering six
people in order to rob them. He excused his client on the score of poverty.
‘It is quite natural,’ he said in conclusion, ‘considering
the state of misery he was in, that he should have thought of murdering these
six people; which of you, gentlemen, would not have done the same in his
place?’”
</p>

<p>
“Enough,” cried Lizabetha Prokofievna abruptly, trembling with
anger, “we have had enough of this balderdash!”
</p>

<p>
In a state of terrible excitement she threw back her head, with flaming eyes,
casting looks of contempt and defiance upon the whole company, in which she
could no longer distinguish friend from foe. She had restrained herself so long
that she felt forced to vent her rage on somebody. Those who knew Lizabetha
Prokofievna saw at once how it was with her. “She flies into these rages
sometimes,” said Ivan Fedorovitch to Prince S. the next day, “but
she is not often so violent as she was yesterday; it does not happen more than
once in three years.”
</p>

<p>
“Be quiet, Ivan Fedorovitch! Leave me alone!” cried Mrs. Epanchin.
“Why do you offer me your arm now? You had not sense enough to take me
away before. You are my husband, you are a father, it was your duty to drag me
away by force, if in my folly I refused to obey you and go quietly. You might
at least have thought of your daughters. We can find our way out now without
your help. Here is shame enough for a year! Wait a moment ‘till I thank
the prince! Thank you, prince, for the entertainment you have given us! It was
most amusing to hear these young men... It is vile, vile! A chaos, a scandal,
worse than a nightmare! Is it possible that there can be many such people on
earth? Be quiet, Aglaya! Be quiet, Alexandra! It is none of your business!
Don’t fuss round me like that, Evgenie Pavlovitch; you exasperate me! So,
my dear,” she cried, addressing the prince, “you go so far as to
beg their pardon! He says, ‘Forgive me for offering you a fortune.’
And you, you mountebank, what are you laughing at?” she cried, turning
suddenly on Lebedeff’s nephew. “‘We refuse ten thousand
roubles; we do not beseech, we demand!’ As if he did not know that this
idiot will call on them tomorrow to renew his offers of money and friendship.
You will, won’t you? You will? Come, will you, or won’t you?”
</p>

<p>
“I shall,” said the prince, with gentle humility.
</p>

<p>
“You hear him! You count upon it, too,” she continued, turning upon
Doktorenko. “You are as sure of him now as if you had the money in your
pocket. And there you are playing the swaggerer to throw dust in our eyes! No,
my dear sir, you may take other people in! I can see through all your airs and
graces, I see your game!”
</p>

<p>
“Lizabetha Prokofievna!” exclaimed the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Come, Lizabetha Prokofievna, it is quite time for us to be going, we
will take the prince with us,” said Prince S. with a smile, in the
coolest possible way.
</p>

<p>
The girls stood apart, almost frightened; their father was positively
horrified. Mrs. Epanchin’s language astonished everybody. Some who stood
a little way off smiled furtively, and talked in whispers. Lebedeff wore an
expression of utmost ecstasy.
</p>

<p>
“Chaos and scandal are to be found everywhere, madame,” remarked
Doktorenko, who was considerably put out of countenance.
</p>

<p>
“Not like this! Nothing like the spectacle you have just given us,
sir,” answered Lizabetha Prokofievna, with a sort of hysterical rage.
“Leave me alone, will you?” she cried violently to those around
her, who were trying to keep her quiet. “No, Evgenie Pavlovitch, if, as
you said yourself just now, a lawyer said in open court that he found it quite
natural that a man should murder six people because he was in misery, the world
must be coming to an end. I had not heard of it before. Now I understand
everything. And this stutterer, won’t he turn out a murderer?” she
cried, pointing to Burdovsky, who was staring at her with stupefaction.
“I bet he will! He will have none of your money, possibly, he will refuse
it because his conscience will not allow him to accept it, but he will go
murdering you by night and walking off with your cashbox, with a clear
conscience! He does not call it a dishonest action but ‘the impulse of a
noble despair’; ‘a negation’; or the devil knows what! Bah!
everything is upside down, everyone walks head downwards. A young girl, brought
up at home, suddenly jumps into a cab in the middle of the street, saying:
‘Good-bye, mother, I married Karlitch, or Ivanitch, the other day!’
And you think it quite right? You call such conduct estimable and natural? The
‘woman question’? Look here,” she continued, pointing to
Colia, “the other day that whippersnapper told me that this was the whole
meaning of the ‘woman question.’ But even supposing that your
mother is a fool, you are none the less, bound to treat her with humanity. Why
did you come here tonight so insolently? ‘Give us our rights, but
don’t dare to speak in our presence. Show us every mark of deepest
respect, while we treat you like the scum of the earth.’ The miscreants
have written a tissue of calumny in their article, and these are the men who
seek for truth, and do battle for the right! ‘We do not beseech, we
demand, you will get no thanks from us, because you will be acting to satisfy
your own conscience!’ What morality! But, good heavens! if you declare
that the prince’s generosity will, excite no gratitude in you, he might
answer that he is not, bound to be grateful to Pavlicheff, who also was only
satisfying his own conscience. But you counted on the prince’s, gratitude
towards Pavlicheff; you never lent him any money; he owes you nothing; then
what were you counting upon if not on his gratitude? And if you appeal to that
sentiment in others, why should you expect to be exempted from it? They are
mad! They say society is savage and inhuman because it despises a young girl
who has been seduced. But if you call society inhuman you imply that the young
girl is made to suffer by its censure. How then, can you hold her up to the
scorn of society in the newspapers without realizing that you are making her
suffering, still greater? Madmen! Vain fools! They don’t believe in God,
they don’t believe in Christ! But you are so eaten up by pride and
vanity, that you will end by devouring each other—that is my prophecy! Is
not this absurd? Is it not monstrous chaos? And after all this, that shameless
creature will go and beg their pardon! Are there many people like you? What are
you smiling at? Because I am not ashamed to disgrace myself before
you?—Yes, I am disgraced—it can’t be helped now! But
don’t you jeer at me, you scum!” (this was aimed at Hippolyte).
“He is almost at his last gasp, yet he corrupts others. You, have got
hold of this lad—” (she pointed to Colia); “you, have turned
his head, you have taught him to be an atheist, you don’t believe in God,
and you are not too old to be whipped, sir! A plague upon you! And so, Prince
Lef Nicolaievitch, you will call on them tomorrow, will you?” she asked
the prince breathlessly, for the second time.
</p>

<p>
“Yes.”
</p>

<p>
“Then I will never speak to you again.” She made a sudden movement
to go, and then turned quickly back. “And you will call on that
atheist?” she continued, pointing to Hippolyte. “How dare you grin
at me like that?” she shouted furiously, rushing at the invalid, whose
mocking smile drove her to distraction.
</p>

<p>
Exclamations arose on all sides.
</p>

<p>
“Lizabetha Prokofievna! Lizabetha Prokofievna! Lizabetha
Prokofievna!”
</p>

<p>
“Mother, this is disgraceful!” cried Aglaya.
</p>

<p>
Mrs. Epanchin had approached Hippolyte and seized him firmly by the arm, while
her eyes, blazing with fury, were fixed upon his face.
</p>

<p>
“Do not distress yourself, Aglaya Ivanovitch,” he answered calmly;
“your mother knows that one cannot strike a dying man. I am ready to
explain why I was laughing. I shall be delighted if you will let
me—”
</p>

<p>
A violent fit of coughing, which lasted a full minute, prevented him from
finishing his sentence.
</p>

<p>
“He is dying, yet he will not stop holding forth!” cried Lizabetha
Prokofievna. She loosed her hold on his arm, almost terrified, as she saw him
wiping the blood from his lips. “Why do you talk? You ought to go home to
bed.”
</p>

<p>
“So I will,” he whispered hoarsely. “As soon as I get home I
will go to bed at once; and I know I shall be dead in a fortnight; Botkine told
me so himself last week. That is why I should like to say a few farewell words,
if you will let me.”
</p>

<p>
“But you must be mad! It is ridiculous! You should take care of yourself;
what is the use of holding a conversation now? Go home to bed, do!” cried
Mrs. Epanchin in horror.
</p>

<p>
“When I do go to bed I shall never get up again,” said Hippolyte,
with a smile. “I meant to take to my bed yesterday and stay there till I
died, but as my legs can still carry me, I put it off for two days, so as to
come here with them to-day—but I am very tired.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, sit down, sit down, why are you standing?”
</p>

<p>
Lizabetha Prokofievna placed a chair for him with her own hands.
</p>

<p>
“Thank you,” he said gently. “Sit opposite to me, and let us
talk. We must have a talk now, Lizabetha Prokofievna; I am very anxious for
it.” He smiled at her once more. “Remember that today, for the last
time, I am out in the air, and in the company of my fellow-men, and that in a
fortnight I shall certainly be no longer in this world. So, in a way, this is
my farewell to nature and to men. I am not very sentimental, but do you know, I
am quite glad that all this has happened at Pavlofsk, where at least one can
see a green tree.”
</p>

<p>
“But why talk now?” replied Lizabetha Prokofievna, more and more
alarmed; “You are quite feverish. Just now you would not stop shouting,
and now you can hardly breathe. You are gasping.”
</p>

<p>
“I shall have time to rest. Why will you not grant my last wish? Do you
know, Lizabetha Prokofievna, that I have dreamed of meeting you for a long
while? I had often heard of you from Colia; he is almost the only person who
still comes to see me. You are an original and eccentric woman; I have seen
that for myself—Do you know, I have even been rather fond of you?”
</p>

<p>
“Good heavens! And I very nearly struck him!”
</p>

<p>
“You were prevented by Aglaya Ivanovna. I think I am not mistaken? That
is your daughter, Aglaya Ivanovna? She is so beautiful that I recognized her
directly, although I had never seen her before. Let me, at least, look on
beauty for the last time in my life,” he said with a wry smile.
“You are here with the prince, and your husband, and a large company. Why
should you refuse to gratify my last wish?”
</p>

<p>
“Give me a chair!” cried Lizabetha Prokofievna, but she seized one
for herself and sat down opposite to Hippolyte. “Colia, you must go home
with him,” she commanded, “and tomorrow I will come my self.”
</p>

<p>
“Will you let me ask the prince for a cup of tea?... I am exhausted. Do
you know what you might do, Lizabetha Prokofievna? I think you wanted to take
the prince home with you for tea. Stay here, and let us spend the evening
together. I am sure the prince will give us all some tea. Forgive me for being
so free and easy—but I know you are kind, and the prince is kind, too. In
fact, we are all good-natured people—it is really quite comical.”
</p>

<p>
The prince bestirred himself to give orders. Lebedeff hurried out, followed by
Vera.
</p>

<p>
“It is quite true,” said Mrs. Epanchin decisively. “Talk, but
not too loud, and don’t excite yourself. You have made me sorry for you.
Prince, you don’t deserve that I should stay and have tea with you, yet I
will, all the same, but I won’t apologize. I apologize to nobody! Nobody!
It is absurd! However, forgive me, prince, if I blew you up—that is, if
you like, of course. But please don’t let me keep anyone,” she
added suddenly to her husband and daughters, in a tone of resentment, as though
they had grievously offended her. “I can come home alone quite
well.”
</p>

<p>
But they did not let her finish, and gathered round her eagerly. The prince
immediately invited everyone to stay for tea, and apologized for not having
thought of it before. The general murmured a few polite words, and asked
Lizabetha Prokofievna if she did not feel cold on the terrace. He very nearly
asked Hippolyte how long he had been at the University, but stopped himself in
time. Evgenie Pavlovitch and Prince S. suddenly grew extremely gay and amiable.
Adelaida and Alexandra had not recovered from their surprise, but it was now
mingled with satisfaction; in short, everyone seemed very much relieved that
Lizabetha Prokofievna had got over her paroxysm. Aglaya alone still frowned,
and sat apart in silence. All the other guests stayed on as well; no one wanted
to go, not even General Ivolgin, but Lebedeff said something to him in passing
which did not seem to please him, for he immediately went and sulked in a
corner. The prince took care to offer tea to Burdovsky and his friends as well
as the rest. The invitation made them rather uncomfortable. They muttered that
they would wait for Hippolyte, and went and sat by themselves in a distant
corner of the verandah. Tea was served at once; Lebedeff had no doubt ordered
it for himself and his family before the others arrived. It was striking
eleven.
</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
