<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			
<h2><a name="part02" id="part02"></a>PART II</h2>

<h3>I.</h3>

<p>
Two days after the strange conclusion to Nastasia Philipovna’s birthday
party, with the record of which we concluded the first part of this story,
Prince Muishkin hurriedly left St. Petersburg for Moscow, in order to see after
some business connected with the receipt of his unexpected fortune.
</p>

<p>
It was said that there were other reasons for his hurried departure; but as to
this, and as to his movements in Moscow, and as to his prolonged absence from
St. Petersburg, we are able to give very little information.
</p>

<p>
The prince was away for six months, and even those who were most interested in
his destiny were able to pick up very little news about him all that while.
True, certain rumours did reach his friends, but these were both strange and
rare, and each one contradicted the last.
</p>

<p>
Of course the Epanchin family was much interested in his movements, though he
had not had time to bid them farewell before his departure. The general,
however, had had an opportunity of seeing him once or twice since the eventful
evening, and had spoken very seriously with him; but though he had seen the
prince, as I say, he told his family nothing about the circumstance. In fact,
for a month or so after his departure it was considered not the thing to
mention the prince’s name in the Epanchin household. Only Mrs. Epanchin,
at the commencement of this period, had announced that she had been
“cruelly mistaken in the prince!” and a day or two after, she had
added, evidently alluding to him, but not mentioning his name, that it was an
unalterable characteristic of hers to be mistaken in people. Then once more,
ten days later, after some passage of arms with one of her daughters, she had
remarked sententiously. “We have had enough of mistakes. I shall be more
careful in future!” However, it was impossible to avoid remarking that
there was some sense of oppression in the household—something unspoken,
but felt; something strained. All the members of the family wore frowning
looks. The general was unusually busy; his family hardly ever saw him.
</p>

<p>
As to the girls, nothing was said openly, at all events; and probably very
little in private. They were proud damsels, and were not always perfectly
confidential even among themselves. But they understood each other thoroughly
at the first word on all occasions; very often at the first glance, so that
there was no need of much talking as a rule.
</p>

<p>
One fact, at least, would have been perfectly plain to an outsider, had any
such person been on the spot; and that was, that the prince had made a very
considerable impression upon the family, in spite of the fact that he had but
once been inside the house, and then only for a short time. Of course, if
analyzed, this impression might have proved to be nothing more than a feeling
of curiosity; but be it what it might, there it undoubtedly was.
</p>

<p>
Little by little, the rumours spread about town became lost in a maze of
uncertainty. It was said that some foolish young prince, name unknown, had
suddenly come into possession of a gigantic fortune, and had married a French
ballet dancer. This was contradicted, and the rumour circulated that it was a
young merchant who had come into the enormous fortune and married the great
ballet dancer, and that at the wedding the drunken young fool had burned
seventy thousand roubles at a candle out of pure bravado.
</p>

<p>
However, all these rumours soon died down, to which circumstance certain facts
largely contributed. For instance, the whole of the Rogojin troop had departed,
with him at their head, for Moscow. This was exactly a week after a dreadful
orgy at the Ekaterinhof gardens, where Nastasia Philipovna had been present. It
became known that after this orgy Nastasia Philipovna had entirely disappeared,
and that she had since been traced to Moscow; so that the exodus of the Rogojin
band was found consistent with this report.
</p>

<p>
There were rumours current as to Gania, too; but circumstances soon
contradicted these. He had fallen seriously ill, and his illness precluded his
appearance in society, and even at business, for over a month. As soon as he
had recovered, however, he threw up his situation in the public company under
General Epanchin’s direction, for some unknown reason, and the post was
given to another. He never went near the Epanchins’ house at all, and was
exceedingly irritable and depressed.
</p>

<p>
Varvara Ardalionovna married Ptitsin this winter, and it was said that the fact
of Gania’s retirement from business was the ultimate cause of the
marriage, since Gania was now not only unable to support his family, but even
required help himself.
</p>

<p>
We may mention that Gania was no longer mentioned in the Epanchin household any
more than the prince was; but that a certain circumstance in connection with
the fatal evening at Nastasia’s house became known to the general, and,
in fact, to all the family the very next day. This fact was that Gania had come
home that night, but had refused to go to bed. He had awaited the
prince’s return from Ekaterinhof with feverish impatience.
</p>

<p>
On the latter’s arrival, at six in the morning, Gania had gone to him in
his room, bringing with him the singed packet of money, which he had insisted
that the prince should return to Nastasia Philipovna without delay. It was said
that when Gania entered the prince’s room, he came with anything but
friendly feelings, and in a condition of despair and misery; but that after a
short conversation, he had stayed on for a couple of hours with him, sobbing
continuously and bitterly the whole time. They had parted upon terms of cordial
friendship.
</p>

<p>
The Epanchins heard about this, as well as about the episode at Nastasia
Philipovna’s. It was strange, perhaps, that the facts should become so
quickly, and fairly accurately, known. As far as Gania was concerned, it might
have been supposed that the news had come through Varvara Ardalionovna, who had
suddenly become a frequent visitor of the Epanchin girls, greatly to their
mother’s surprise. But though Varvara had seen fit, for some reason, to
make friends with them, it was not likely that she would have talked to them
about her brother. She had plenty of pride, in spite of the fact that in thus
acting she was seeking intimacy with people who had practically shown her
brother the door. She and the Epanchin girls had been acquainted in childhood,
although of late they had met but rarely. Even now Varvara hardly ever appeared
in the drawing-room, but would slip in by a back way. Lizabetha Prokofievna,
who disliked Varvara, although she had a great respect for her mother, was much
annoyed by this sudden intimacy, and put it down to the general
“contrariness” of her daughters, who were “always on the
lookout for some new way of opposing her.” Nevertheless, Varvara
continued her visits.
</p>

<p>
A month after Muishkin’s departure, Mrs. Epanchin received a letter from
her old friend Princess Bielokonski (who had lately left for Moscow), which
letter put her into the greatest good humour. She did not divulge its contents
either to her daughters or the general, but her conduct towards the former
became affectionate in the extreme. She even made some sort of confession to
them, but they were unable to understand what it was about. She actually
relaxed towards the general a little—he had been long disgraced—and
though she managed to quarrel with them all the next day, yet she soon came
round, and from her general behaviour it was to be concluded that she had had
good news of some sort, which she would like, but could not make up her mind,
to disclose.
</p>

<p>
However, a week later she received another letter from the same source, and at
last resolved to speak.
</p>

<p>
She solemnly announced that she had heard from old Princess Bielokonski, who
had given her most comforting news about “that queer young prince.”
Her friend had hunted him up, and found that all was going well with him. He
had since called in person upon her, making an extremely favourable impression,
for the princess had received him each day since, and had introduced him into
several good houses.
</p>

<p>
The girls could see that their mother concealed a great deal from them, and
left out large pieces of the letter in reading it to them.
</p>

<p>
However, the ice was broken, and it suddenly became possible to mention the
prince’s name again. And again it became evident how very strong was the
impression the young man had made in the household by his one visit there. Mrs.
Epanchin was surprised at the effect which the news from Moscow had upon the
girls, and they were no less surprised that after solemnly remarking that her
most striking characteristic was “being mistaken in people” she
should have troubled to obtain for the prince the favour and protection of so
powerful an old lady as the Princess Bielokonski. As soon as the ice was thus
broken, the general lost no time in showing that he, too, took the greatest
interest in the subject. He admitted that he was interested, but said that it
was merely in the business side of the question. It appeared that, in the
interests of the prince, he had made arrangements in Moscow for a careful watch
to be kept upon the prince’s business affairs, and especially upon
Salaskin. All that had been said as to the prince being an undoubted heir to a
fortune turned out to be perfectly true; but the fortune proved to be much
smaller than was at first reported. The estate was considerably encumbered with
debts; creditors turned up on all sides, and the prince, in spite of all advice
and entreaty, insisted upon managing all matters of claim himself—which,
of course, meant satisfying everybody all round, although half the claims were
absolutely fraudulent.
</p>

<p>
Mrs. Epanchin confirmed all this. She said the princess had written to much the
same effect, and added that there was no curing a fool. But it was plain, from
her expression of face, how strongly she approved of this particular young
fool’s doings. In conclusion, the general observed that his wife took as
great an interest in the prince as though he were her own son; and that she had
commenced to be especially affectionate towards Aglaya was a self-evident fact.
</p>

<p>
All this caused the general to look grave and important. But, alas! this
agreeable state of affairs very soon changed once more.
</p>

<p>
A couple of weeks went by, and suddenly the general and his wife were once more
gloomy and silent, and the ice was as firm as ever. The fact was, the general,
who had heard first, how Nastasia Philipovna had fled to Moscow and had been
discovered there by Rogojin; that she had then disappeared once more, and been
found again by Rogojin, and how after that she had almost promised to marry
him, now received news that she had once more disappeared, almost on the very
day fixed for her wedding, flying somewhere into the interior of Russia this
time, and that Prince Muishkin had left all his affairs in the hands of
Salaskin and disappeared also—but whether he was with Nastasia, or had
only set off in search of her, was unknown.
</p>

<p>
Lizabetha Prokofievna received confirmatory news from the princess—and
alas, two months after the prince’s first departure from St. Petersburg,
darkness and mystery once more enveloped his whereabouts and actions, and in
the Epanchin family the ice of silence once more formed over the subject.
Varia, however, informed the girls of what had happened, she having received
the news from Ptitsin, who generally knew more than most people.
</p>

<p>
To make an end, we may say that there were many changes in the Epanchin
household in the spring, so that it was not difficult to forget the prince, who
sent no news of himself.
</p>

<p>
The Epanchin family had at last made up their minds to spend the summer abroad,
all except the general, who could not waste time in “travelling for
enjoyment,” of course. This arrangement was brought about by the
persistence of the girls, who insisted that they were never allowed to go
abroad because their parents were too anxious to marry them off. Perhaps their
parents had at last come to the conclusion that husbands might be found abroad,
and that a summer’s travel might bear fruit. The marriage between
Alexandra and Totski had been broken off. Since the prince’s departure
from St. Petersburg no more had been said about it; the subject had been
dropped without ceremony, much to the joy of Mrs. General, who, announced that
she was “ready to cross herself with both hands” in gratitude for
the escape. The general, however, regretted Totski for a long while.
“Such a fortune!” he sighed, “and such a good, easy-going
fellow!”
</p>

<p>
After a time it became known that Totski had married a French marquise, and was
to be carried off by her to Paris, and then to Brittany.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, well,” thought the general, “he’s lost to us for
good, now.”
</p>

<p>
So the Epanchins prepared to depart for the summer.
</p>

<p>
But now another circumstance occurred, which changed all the plans once more,
and again the intended journey was put off, much to the delight of the general
and his spouse.
</p>

<p>
A certain Prince S—— arrived in St. Petersburg from Moscow, an
eminent and honourable young man. He was one of those active persons who always
find some good work with which to employ themselves. Without forcing himself
upon the public notice, modest and unobtrusive, this young prince was concerned
with much that happened in the world in general.
</p>

<p>
He had served, at first, in one of the civil departments, had then attended to
matters connected with the local government of provincial towns, and had of
late been a corresponding member of several important scientific societies. He
was a man of excellent family and solid means, about thirty-five years of age.
</p>

<p>
Prince S—— made the acquaintance of the general’s family, and
Adelaida, the second girl, made a great impression upon him. Towards the spring
he proposed to her, and she accepted him. The general and his wife were
delighted. The journey abroad was put off, and the wedding was fixed for a day
not very distant.
</p>

<p>
The trip abroad might have been enjoyed later on by Mrs. Epanchin and her two
remaining daughters, but for another circumstance.
</p>

<p>
It so happened that Prince S—— introduced a distant relation of his
own into the Epanchin family—one Evgenie Pavlovitch, a young officer of
about twenty-eight years of age, whose conquests among the ladies in Moscow had
been proverbial. This young gentleman no sooner set eyes on Aglaya than he
became a frequent visitor at the house. He was witty, well-educated, and
extremely wealthy, as the general very soon discovered. His past reputation was
the only thing against him.
</p>

<p>
Nothing was said; there were not even any hints dropped; but still, it seemed
better to the parents to say nothing more about going abroad this season, at
all events. Aglaya herself perhaps was of a different opinion.
</p>

<p>
All this happened just before the second appearance of our hero upon the scene.
</p>

<p>
By this time, to judge from appearances, poor Prince Muishkin had been quite
forgotten in St. Petersburg. If he had appeared suddenly among his
acquaintances, he would have been received as one from the skies; but we must
just glance at one more fact before we conclude this preface.
</p>

<p>
Colia Ivolgin, for some time after the prince’s departure, continued his
old life. That is, he went to school, looked after his father, helped Varia in
the house, and ran her errands, and went frequently to see his friend,
Hippolyte.
</p>

<p>
The lodgers had disappeared very quickly—Ferdishenko soon after the
events at Nastasia Philipovna’s, while the prince went to Moscow, as we
know. Gania and his mother went to live with Varia and Ptitsin immediately
after the latter’s wedding, while the general was housed in a
debtor’s prison by reason of certain IOU’s given to the
captain’s widow under the impression that they would never be formally
used against him. This unkind action much surprised poor Ardalion
Alexandrovitch, the victim, as he called himself, of an “unbounded trust
in the nobility of the human heart.”
</p>

<p>
When he signed those notes of hand he never dreamt that they would be a source
of future trouble. The event showed that he was mistaken. “Trust in
anyone after this! Have the least confidence in man or woman!” he cried
in bitter tones, as he sat with his new friends in prison, and recounted to
them his favourite stories of the siege of Kars, and the resuscitated soldier.
On the whole, he accommodated himself very well to his new position. Ptitsin
and Varia declared that he was in the right place, and Gania was of the same
opinion. The only person who deplored his fate was poor Nina Alexandrovna, who
wept bitter tears over him, to the great surprise of her household, and, though
always in feeble health, made a point of going to see him as often as possible.
</p>

<p>
Since the general’s “mishap,” as Colia called it, and the
marriage of his sister, the boy had quietly possessed himself of far more
freedom. His relations saw little of him, for he rarely slept at home. He made
many new friends; and was moreover, a frequent visitor at the debtor’s
prison, to which he invariably accompanied his mother. Varia, who used to be
always correcting him, never spoke to him now on the subject of his frequent
absences, and the whole household was surprised to see Gania, in spite of his
depression, on quite friendly terms with his brother. This was something new,
for Gania had been wont to look upon Colia as a kind of errand-boy, treating
him with contempt, threatening to “pull his ears,” and in general
driving him almost wild with irritation. It seemed now that Gania really needed
his brother, and the latter, for his part, felt as if he could forgive Gania
much since he had returned the hundred thousand roubles offered to him by
Nastasia Philipovna. Three months after the departure of the prince, the
Ivolgin family discovered that Colia had made acquaintance with the Epanchins,
and was on very friendly terms with the daughters. Varia heard of it first,
though Colia had not asked her to introduce him. Little by little the family
grew quite fond of him. Madame Epanchin at first looked on him with disdain,
and received him coldly, but in a short time he grew to please her, because, as
she said, he “was candid and no flatterer”—a very true
description. From the first he put himself on an equality with his new friends,
and though he sometimes read newspapers and books to the mistress of the house,
it was simply because he liked to be useful.
</p>

<p>
One day, however, he and Lizabetha Prokofievna quarrelled seriously about the
“woman question,” in the course of a lively discussion on that
burning subject. He told her that she was a tyrant, and that he would never set
foot in her house again. It may seem incredible, but a day or two after, Madame
Epanchin sent a servant with a note begging him to return, and Colia, without
standing on his dignity, did so at once.
</p>

<p>
Aglaya was the only one of the family whose good graces he could not gain, and
who always spoke to him haughtily, but it so happened that the boy one day
succeeded in giving the proud maiden a surprise.
</p>

<p>
It was about Easter, when, taking advantage of a momentary tête-à-tête Colia
handed Aglaya a letter, remarking that he “had orders to deliver it to
her privately.” She stared at him in amazement, but he did not wait to
hear what she had to say, and went out. Aglaya broke the seal, and read as
follows:
</p>

<p class="letter">
“Once you did me the honour of giving me your confidence. Perhaps you
have quite forgotten me now! How is it that I am writing to you? I do not know;
but I am conscious of an irresistible desire to remind you of my existence,
especially you. How many times I have needed all three of you; but only you
have dwelt always in my mind’s eye. I need you—I need you very
much. I will not write about myself. I have nothing to tell you. But I long for
you to be happy. <i>Are</i> you happy? That is all I wished to say to
you—Your brother,
</p>

<p class="right">
“Pr. L. Muishkin.”
</p>

<p>
On reading this short and disconnected note, Aglaya suddenly blushed all over,
and became very thoughtful.
</p>

<p>
It would be difficult to describe her thoughts at that moment. One of them was,
“Shall I show it to anyone?” But she was ashamed to show it. So she
ended by hiding it in her table drawer, with a very strange, ironical smile
upon her lips.
</p>

<p>
Next day, she took it out, and put it into a large book, as she usually did
with papers which she wanted to be able to find easily. She laughed when, about
a week later, she happened to notice the name of the book, and saw that it was
Don Quixote, but it would be difficult to say exactly why.
</p>

<p>
I cannot say, either, whether she showed the letter to her sisters.
</p>

<p>
But when she had read it herself once more, it suddenly struck her that surely
that conceited boy, Colia, had not been the one chosen correspondent of the
prince all this while. She determined to ask him, and did so with an
exaggerated show of carelessness. He informed her haughtily that though he had
given the prince his permanent address when the latter left town, and had
offered his services, the prince had never before given him any commission to
perform, nor had he written until the following lines arrived, with
Aglaya’s letter. Aglaya took the note, and read it.
</p>

<p class="letter">
“D<small>EAR</small> C<small>OLIA</small>,—Please be so kind as to
give the enclosed sealed letter to Aglaya Ivanovna. Keep well—Ever your
loving,
</p>

<p class="right">
“Pr. L. Muishkin.”
</p>


<p>
“It seems absurd to trust a little pepper-box like you,” said
Aglaya, as she returned the note, and walked past the “pepper-box”
with an expression of great contempt.
</p>

<p>
This was more than Colia could bear. He had actually borrowed Gania’s new
green tie for the occasion, without saying why he wanted it, in order to
impress her. He was very deeply mortified.
</p>

<h3>II.</h3>

<p>
It was the beginning of June, and for a whole week the weather in St.
Petersburg had been magnificent. The Epanchins had a luxurious country-house at
Pavlofsk, [One of the fashionable summer resorts near St. Petersburg.] and to
this spot Mrs. Epanchin determined to proceed without further delay. In a
couple of days all was ready, and the family had left town. A day or two after
this removal to Pavlofsk, Prince Muishkin arrived in St. Petersburg by the
morning train from Moscow. No one met him; but, as he stepped out of the
carriage, he suddenly became aware of two strangely glowing eyes fixed upon him
from among the crowd that met the train. On endeavouring to re-discover the
eyes, and see to whom they belonged, he could find nothing to guide him. It
must have been a hallucination. But the disagreeable impression remained, and
without this, the prince was sad and thoughtful already, and seemed to be much
preoccupied.
</p>

<p>
His cab took him to a small and bad hotel near the Litaynaya. Here he engaged a
couple of rooms, dark and badly furnished. He washed and changed, and hurriedly
left the hotel again, as though anxious to waste no time. Anyone who now saw
him for the first time since he left Petersburg would judge that he had
improved vastly so far as his exterior was concerned. His clothes certainly
were very different; they were more fashionable, perhaps even too much so, and
anyone inclined to mockery might have found something to smile at in his
appearance. But what is there that people will not smile at?
</p>

<p>
The prince took a cab and drove to a street near the Nativity, where he soon
discovered the house he was seeking. It was a small wooden villa, and he was
struck by its attractive and clean appearance; it stood in a pleasant little
garden, full of flowers. The windows looking on the street were open, and the
sound of a voice, reading aloud or making a speech, came through them. It rose
at times to a shout, and was interrupted occasionally by bursts of laughter.
</p>

<p>
Prince Muishkin entered the court-yard, and ascended the steps. A cook with her
sleeves turned up to the elbows opened the door. The visitor asked if Mr.
Lebedeff were at home.
</p>

<p>
“He is in there,” said she, pointing to the salon.
</p>

<p>
The room had a blue wall-paper, and was well, almost pretentiously, furnished,
with its round table, its divan, and its bronze clock under a glass shade.
There was a narrow pier-glass against the wall, and a chandelier adorned with
lustres hung by a bronze chain from the ceiling.
</p>

<p>
When the prince entered, Lebedeff was standing in the middle of the room, his
back to the door. He was in his shirt-sleeves, on account of the extreme heat,
and he seemed to have just reached the peroration of his speech, and was
impressively beating his breast.
</p>

<p>
His audience consisted of a youth of about fifteen years of age with a clever
face, who had a book in his hand, though he was not reading; a young lady of
twenty, in deep mourning, stood near him with an infant in her arms; another
girl of thirteen, also in black, was laughing loudly, her mouth wide open; and
on the sofa lay a handsome young man, with black hair and eyes, and a suspicion
of beard and whiskers. He frequently interrupted the speaker and argued with
him, to the great delight of the others.
</p>

<p>
“Lukian Timofeyovitch! Lukian Timofeyovitch! Here’s someone to see
you! Look here!... a gentleman to speak to you!... Well, it’s not my
fault!” and the cook turned and went away red with anger.
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff started, and at sight of the prince stood like a statue for a moment.
Then he moved up to him with an ingratiating smile, but stopped short again.
</p>

<p>
“Prince! ex-ex-excellency!” he stammered. Then suddenly he ran
towards the girl with the infant, a movement so unexpected by her that she
staggered and fell back, but next moment he was threatening the other child,
who was standing, still laughing, in the doorway. She screamed, and ran towards
the kitchen. Lebedeff stamped his foot angrily; then, seeing the prince
regarding him with amazement, he murmured apologetically—“Pardon to
show respect!... he-he!”
</p>

<p>
“You are quite wrong...” began the prince.
</p>

<p>
“At once... at once... in one moment!”
</p>

<p>
He rushed like a whirlwind from the room, and Muishkin looked inquiringly at
the others.
</p>

<p>
They were all laughing, and the guest joined in the chorus.
</p>

<p>
“He has gone to get his coat,” said the boy.
</p>

<p>
“How annoying!” exclaimed the prince. “I thought... Tell me,
is he...”
</p>

<p>
“You think he is drunk?” cried the young man on the sofa.
“Not in the least. He’s only had three or four small glasses,
perhaps five; but what is that? The usual thing!”
</p>

<p>
As the prince opened his mouth to answer, he was interrupted by the girl, whose
sweet face wore an expression of absolute frankness.
</p>

<p>
“He never drinks much in the morning; if you have come to talk business
with him, do it now. It is the best time. He sometimes comes back drunk in the
evening; but just now he passes the greater part of the evening in tears, and
reads passages of Holy Scripture aloud, because our mother died five weeks
ago.”
</p>

<p>
“No doubt he ran off because he did not know what to say to you,”
said the youth on the divan. “I bet he is trying to cheat you, and is
thinking how best to do it.”
</p>

<p>
Just then Lebedeff returned, having put on his coat.
</p>

<p>
“Five weeks!” said he, wiping his eyes. “Only five weeks!
Poor orphans!”
</p>

<p>
“But why wear a coat in holes,” asked the girl, “when your
new one is hanging behind the door? Did you not see it?”
</p>

<p>
“Hold your tongue, dragon-fly!” he scolded. “What a plague
you are!” He stamped his foot irritably, but she only laughed, and
answered:
</p>

<p>
“Are you trying to frighten me? I am not Tania, you know, and I
don’t intend to run away. Look, you are waking Lubotchka, and she will
have convulsions again. Why do you shout like that?”
</p>

<p>
“Well, well! I won’t again,” said the master of the house,
his anxiety getting the better of his temper. He went up to his daughter, and
looked at the child in her arms, anxiously making the sign of the cross over
her three times. “God bless her! God bless her!” he cried with
emotion. “This little creature is my daughter Luboff,” addressing
the prince. “My wife, Helena, died—at her birth; and this is my big
daughter Vera, in mourning, as you see; and this, this, oh, this,”
pointing to the young man on the divan...
</p>

<p>
“Well, go on! never mind me!” mocked the other. “Don’t
be afraid!”
</p>

<p>
“Excellency! Have you read that account of the murder of the Zemarin
family, in the newspaper?” cried Lebedeff, all of a sudden.
</p>

<p>
“Yes,” said Muishkin, with some surprise.
</p>

<p>
“Well, that is the murderer! It is he—in fact—”
</p>

<p>
“What do you mean?” asked the visitor.
</p>

<p>
“I am speaking allegorically, of course; but he will be the murderer of a
Zemarin family in the future. He is getting ready. ...”
</p>

<p>
They all laughed, and the thought crossed the prince’s mind that perhaps
Lebedeff was really trifling in this way because he foresaw inconvenient
questions, and wanted to gain time.
</p>

<p>
“He is a traitor! a conspirator!” shouted Lebedeff, who seemed to
have lost all control over himself. “A monster! a slanderer! Ought I to
treat him as a nephew, the son of my sister Anisia?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh! do be quiet! You must be drunk! He has taken it into his head to
play the lawyer, prince, and he practices speechifying, and is always repeating
his eloquent pleadings to his children. And who do you think was his last
client? An old woman who had been robbed of five hundred roubles, her all, by
some rogue of a usurer, besought him to take up her case, instead of which he
defended the usurer himself, a Jew named Zeidler, because this Jew promised to
give him fifty roubles....”
</p>

<p>
“It was to be fifty if I won the case, only five if I lost,”
interrupted Lebedeff, speaking in a low tone, a great contrast to his earlier
manner.
</p>

<p>
“Well! naturally he came to grief: the law is not administered as it used
to be, and he only got laughed at for his pains. But he was much pleased with
himself in spite of that. ‘Most learned judge!’ said he,
‘picture this unhappy man, crippled by age and infirmities, who gains his
living by honourable toil—picture him, I repeat, robbed of his all, of
his last mouthful; remember, I entreat you, the words of that learned
legislator, “Let mercy and justice alike rule the courts of
law.”’ Now, would you believe it, excellency, every morning he
recites this speech to us from beginning to end, exactly as he spoke it before
the magistrate. To-day we have heard it for the fifth time. He was just
starting again when you arrived, so much does he admire it. He is now preparing
to undertake another case. I think, by the way, that you are Prince Muishkin?
Colia tells me you are the cleverest man he has ever known....”
</p>

<p>
“The cleverest in the world,” interrupted his uncle hastily.
</p>

<p>
“I do not pay much attention to that opinion,” continued the young
man calmly. “Colia is very fond of you, but he,” pointing to
Lebedeff, “is flattering you. I can assure you I have no intention of
flattering you, or anyone else, but at least you have some common-sense. Well,
will you judge between us? Shall we ask the prince to act as arbitrator?”
he went on, addressing his uncle.
</p>

<p>
“I am so glad you chanced to come here, prince.”
</p>

<p>
“I agree,” said Lebedeff, firmly, looking round involuntarily at
his daughter, who had come nearer, and was listening attentively to the
conversation.
</p>

<p>
“What is it all about?” asked the prince, frowning. His head ached,
and he felt sure that Lebedeff was trying to cheat him in some way, and only
talking to put off the explanation that he had come for.
</p>

<p>
“I will tell you all the story. I am his nephew; he did speak the truth
there, although he is generally telling lies. I am at the University, and have
not yet finished my course. I mean to do so, and I shall, for I have a
determined character. I must, however, find something to do for the present,
and therefore I have got employment on the railway at twenty-four roubles a
month. I admit that my uncle has helped me once or twice before. Well, I had
twenty roubles in my pocket, and I gambled them away. Can you believe that I
should be so low, so base, as to lose money in that way?”
</p>

<p>
“And the man who won it is a rogue, a rogue whom you ought not to have
paid!” cried Lebedeff.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, he is a rogue, but I was obliged to pay him,” said the young
man. “As to his being a rogue, he is assuredly that, and I am not saying
it because he beat you. He is an ex-lieutenant, prince, dismissed from the
service, a teacher of boxing, and one of Rogojin’s followers. They are
all lounging about the pavements now that Rogojin has turned them off. Of
course, the worst of it is that, knowing he was a rascal, and a card-sharper, I
none the less played palki with him, and risked my last rouble. To tell the
truth, I thought to myself, ‘If I lose, I will go to my uncle, and I am
sure he will not refuse to help me.’ Now that was base—cowardly and
base!”
</p>

<p>
“That is so,” observed Lebedeff quietly; “cowardly and
base.”
</p>

<p>
“Well, wait a bit, before you begin to triumph,” said the nephew
viciously; for the words seemed to irritate him. “He is delighted! I came
to him here and told him everything: I acted honourably, for I did not excuse
myself. I spoke most severely of my conduct, as everyone here can witness. But
I must smarten myself up before I take up my new post, for I am really like a
tramp. Just look at my boots! I cannot possibly appear like this, and if I am
not at the bureau at the time appointed, the job will be given to someone else;
and I shall have to try for another. Now I only beg for fifteen roubles, and I
give my word that I will never ask him for anything again. I am also ready to
promise to repay my debt in three months’ time, and I will keep my word,
even if I have to live on bread and water. My salary will amount to
seventy-five roubles in three months. The sum I now ask, added to what I have
borrowed already, will make a total of about thirty-five roubles, so you see I
shall have enough to pay him and confound him! if he wants interest, he shall
have that, too! Haven’t I always paid back the money he lent me before?
Why should he be so mean now? He grudges my having paid that lieutenant; there
can be no other reason! That’s the kind he is—a dog in the
manger!”
</p>

<p>
“And he won’t go away!” cried Lebedeff. “He has
installed himself here, and here he remains!”
</p>

<p>
“I have told you already, that I will not go away until I have got what I
ask. Why are you smiling, prince? You look as if you disapproved of me.”
</p>

<p>
“I am not smiling, but I really think you are in the wrong,
somewhat,” replied Muishkin, reluctantly.
</p>

<p>
“Don’t shuffle! Say plainly that you think that I am quite wrong,
without any ‘somewhat’! Why ‘somewhat’?”
</p>

<p>
“I will say you are quite wrong, if you wish.”
</p>

<p>
“If I wish! That’s good, I must say! Do you think I am deceived as
to the flagrant impropriety of my conduct? I am quite aware that his money is
his own, and that my action—is much like an attempt at extortion. But
you-you don’t know what life is! If people don’t learn by
experience, they never understand. They must be taught. My intentions are
perfectly honest; on my conscience he will lose nothing, and I will pay back
the money with interest. Added to which he has had the moral satisfaction of
seeing me disgraced. What does he want more? and what is he good for if he
never helps anyone? Look what he does himself! just ask him about his dealings
with others, how he deceives people! How did he manage to buy this house? You
may cut off my head if he has not let you in for something—and if he is
not trying to cheat you again. You are smiling. You don’t believe
me?”
</p>

<p>
“It seems to me that all this has nothing to do with your affairs,”
remarked the prince.
</p>

<p>
“I have lain here now for three days,” cried the young man without
noticing, “and I have seen a lot! Fancy! he suspects his daughter, that
angel, that orphan, my cousin—he suspects her, and every evening he
searches her room, to see if she has a lover hidden in it! He comes here too on
tiptoe, creeping softly—oh, so softly—and looks under the
sofa—my bed, you know. He is mad with suspicion, and sees a thief in
every corner. He runs about all night long; he was up at least seven times last
night, to satisfy himself that the windows and doors were barred, and to peep
into the oven. That man who appears in court for scoundrels, rushes in here in
the night and prays, lying prostrate, banging his head on the ground by the
half-hour—and for whom do you think he prays? Who are the sinners
figuring in his drunken petitions? I have heard him with my own ears praying
for the repose of the soul of the Countess du Barry! Colia heard it too. He is
as mad as a March hare!”
</p>

<p>
“You hear how he slanders me, prince,” said Lebedeff, almost beside
himself with rage. “I may be a drunkard, an evil-doer, a thief, but at
least I can say one thing for myself. He does not know—how should he,
mocker that he is?—that when he came into the world it was I who washed
him, and dressed him in his swathing-bands, for my sister Anisia had lost her
husband, and was in great poverty. I was very little better off than she, but I
sat up night after night with her, and nursed both mother and child; I used to
go downstairs and steal wood for them from the house-porter. How often did I
sing him to sleep when I was half dead with hunger! In short, I was more than a
father to him, and now—now he jeers at me! Even if I did cross myself,
and pray for the repose of the soul of the Comtesse du Barry, what does it
matter? Three days ago, for the first time in my life, I read her biography in
an historical dictionary. Do you know who she was? You there!” addressing
his nephew. “Speak! do you know?”
</p>

<p>
“Of course no one knows anything about her but you,” muttered the
young man in a would-be jeering tone.
</p>

<p>
“She was a Countess who rose from shame to reign like a Queen. An Empress
wrote to her, with her own hand, as ‘<i>Ma chère cousine</i>.’ At a
<i>lever-du-roi</i> one morning (do you know what a <i>lever-du-roi</i>
was?)—a Cardinal, a Papal legate, offered to put on her stockings; a high
and holy person like that looked on it as an honour! Did you know this? I see
by your expression that you did not! Well, how did she die? Answer!”
</p>

<p>
“Oh! do stop—you are too absurd!”
</p>

<p>
“This is how she died. After all this honour and glory, after having been
almost a Queen, she was guillotined by that butcher, Samson. She was quite
innocent, but it had to be done, for the satisfaction of the fishwives of
Paris. She was so terrified, that she did not understand what was happening.
But when Samson seized her head, and pushed her under the knife with his foot,
she cried out: ‘Wait a moment! wait a moment, monsieur!’ Well,
because of that moment of bitter suffering, perhaps the Saviour will pardon her
other faults, for one cannot imagine a greater agony. As I read the story my
heart bled for her. And what does it matter to you, little worm, if I implored
the Divine mercy for her, great sinner as she was, as I said my evening prayer?
I might have done it because I doubted if anyone had ever crossed himself for
her sake before. It may be that in the other world she will rejoice to think
that a sinner like herself has cried to heaven for the salvation of her soul.
Why are you laughing? You believe nothing, atheist! And your story was not even
correct! If you had listened to what I was saying, you would have heard that I
did not only pray for the Comtesse du Barry. I said, ‘Oh Lord! give rest
to the soul of that great sinner, the Comtesse du Barry, and to all unhappy
ones like her.’ You see that is quite a different thing, for how many
sinners there are, how many women, who have passed through the trials of this
life, are now suffering and groaning in purgatory! I prayed for you, too, in
spite of your insolence and impudence, also for your fellows, as it seems that
you claim to know how I pray...”
</p>

<p>
“Oh! that’s enough in all conscience! Pray for whom you choose, and
the devil take them and you! We have a scholar here; you did not know that,
prince?” he continued, with a sneer. “He reads all sorts of books
and memoirs now.”
</p>

<p>
“At any rate, your uncle has a kind heart,” remarked the prince,
who really had to force himself to speak to the nephew, so much did he dislike
him.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, now you are going to praise him! He will be set up! He puts his hand
on his heart, and he is delighted! I never said he was a man without heart, but
he is a rascal—that’s the pity of it. And then, he is addicted to
drink, and his mind is unhinged, like that of most people who have taken more
than is good for them for years. He loves his children—oh, I know that
well enough! He respected my aunt, his late wife... and he even has a sort of
affection for me. He has remembered me in his will.”
</p>

<p>
“I shall leave you nothing!” exclaimed his uncle angrily.
</p>

<p>
“Listen to me, Lebedeff,” said the prince in a decided voice,
turning his back on the young man. “I know by experience that when you
choose, you can be business-like... I have very little time to spare, and if
you... By the way—excuse me—what is your Christian name? I have
forgotten it.”
</p>

<p>
“Ti-Ti-Timofey.”
</p>

<p>
“And?”
</p>

<p>
“Lukianovitch.”
</p>

<p>
Everyone in the room began to laugh.
</p>

<p>
“He is telling lies!” cried the nephew. “Even now he cannot
speak the truth. He is not called Timofey Lukianovitch, prince, but Lukian
Timofeyovitch. Now do tell us why you must needs lie about it? Lukian or
Timofey, it is all the same to you, and what difference can it make to the
prince? He tells lies without the least necessity, simply by force of habit, I
assure you.”
</p>

<p>
“Is that true?” said the prince impatiently.
</p>

<p>
“My name really is Lukian Timofeyovitch,” acknowledged Lebedeff,
lowering his eyes, and putting his hand on his heart.
</p>

<p>
“Well, for God’s sake, what made you say the other?”
</p>

<p>
“To humble myself,” murmured Lebedeff.
</p>

<p>
“What on earth do you mean? Oh I if only I knew where Colia was at this
moment!” cried the prince, standing up, as if to go.
</p>

<p>
“I can tell you all about Colia,” said the young man
</p>

<p>
“Oh! no, no!” said Lebedeff, hurriedly.
</p>

<p>
“Colia spent the night here, and this morning went after his father, whom
you let out of prison by paying his debts—Heaven only knows why!
Yesterday the general promised to come and lodge here, but he did not appear.
Most probably he slept at the hotel close by. No doubt Colia is there, unless
he has gone to Pavlofsk to see the Epanchins. He had a little money, and was
intending to go there yesterday. He must be either at the hotel or at
Pavlofsk.”
</p>

<p>
“At Pavlofsk! He is at Pavlofsk, undoubtedly!” interrupted
Lebedeff.... “But come—let us go into the garden—we will have
coffee there....” And Lebedeff seized the prince’s arm, and led him
from the room. They went across the yard, and found themselves in a delightful
little garden with the trees already in their summer dress of green, thanks to
the unusually fine weather. Lebedeff invited his guest to sit down on a green
seat before a table of the same colour fixed in the earth, and took a seat
facing him. In a few minutes the coffee appeared, and the prince did not refuse
it. The host kept his eyes fixed on Muishkin, with an expression of passionate
servility.
</p>

<p>
“I knew nothing about your home before,” said the prince absently,
as if he were thinking of something else.
</p>

<p>
“Poor orphans,” began Lebedeff, his face assuming a mournful air,
but he stopped short, for the other looked at him inattentively, as if he had
already forgotten his own remark. They waited a few minutes in silence, while
Lebedeff sat with his eyes fixed mournfully on the young man’s face.
</p>

<p>
“Well!” said the latter, at last rousing himself. “Ah! yes!
You know why I came, Lebedeff. Your letter brought me. Speak! Tell me all about
it.”
</p>

<p>
The clerk, rather confused, tried to say something, hesitated, began to speak,
and again stopped. The prince looked at him gravely.
</p>

<p>
“I think I understand, Lukian Timofeyovitch: you were not sure that I
should come. You did not think I should start at the first word from you, and
you merely wrote to relieve your conscience. However, you see now that I have
come, and I have had enough of trickery. Give up serving, or trying to serve,
two masters. Rogojin has been here these three weeks. Have you managed to sell
her to him as you did before? Tell me the truth.”
</p>

<p>
“He discovered everything, the monster... himself......”
</p>

<p>
“Don’t abuse him; though I dare say you have something to complain
of....”
</p>

<p>
“He beat me, he thrashed me unmercifully!” replied Lebedeff
vehemently. “He set a dog on me in Moscow, a bloodhound, a terrible beast
that chased me all down the street.”
</p>

<p>
“You seem to take me for a child, Lebedeff. Tell me, is it a fact that
she left him while they were in Moscow?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, it is a fact, and this time, let me tell you, on the very eve of
their marriage! It was a question of minutes when she slipped off to
Petersburg. She came to me directly she arrived—‘Save me, Lukian!
find me some refuge, and say nothing to the prince!’ She is afraid of
you, even more than she is of him, and in that she shows her wisdom!” And
Lebedeff slily put his finger to his brow as he said the last words.
</p>

<p>
“And now it is you who have brought them together again?”
</p>

<p>
“Excellency, how could I, how could I prevent it?”
</p>

<p>
“That will do. I can find out for myself. Only tell me, where is she now?
At his house? With him?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh no! Certainly not! ‘I am free,’ she says; you know how
she insists on that point. ‘I am entirely free.’ She repeats it
over and over again. She is living in Petersburgskaia, with my sister-in-law,
as I told you in my letter.”
</p>

<p>
“She is there at this moment?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, unless she has gone to Pavlofsk: the fine weather may have tempted
her, perhaps, into the country, with Daria Alexeyevna. ‘I am quite
free,’ she says. Only yesterday she boasted of her freedom to Nicolai
Ardalionovitch—a bad sign,” added Lebedeff, smiling.
</p>

<p>
“Colia goes to see her often, does he not?”
</p>

<p>
“He is a strange boy, thoughtless, and inclined to be indiscreet.”
</p>

<p>
“Is it long since you saw her?”
</p>

<p>
“I go to see her every day, every day.”
</p>

<p>
“Then you were there yesterday?”
</p>

<p>
“N-no: I have not been these three last days.”
</p>

<p>
“It is a pity you have taken too much wine, Lebedeff I want to ask you
something... but...”
</p>

<p>
“All right! all right! I am not drunk,” replied the clerk,
preparing to listen.
</p>

<p>
“Tell me, how was she when you left her?”
</p>

<p>
“She is a woman who is seeking...”
</p>

<p>
“Seeking?”
</p>

<p>
“She seems always to be searching about, as if she had lost something.
The mere idea of her coming marriage disgusts her; she looks on it as an
insult. She cares as much for <i>him</i> as for a piece of
orange-peel—not more. Yet I am much mistaken if she does not look on him
with fear and trembling. She forbids his name to be mentioned before her, and
they only meet when unavoidable. He understands, well enough! But it must be
gone through. She is restless, mocking, deceitful, violent....”
</p>

<p>
“Deceitful and violent?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, violent. I can give you a proof of it. A few days ago she tried to
pull my hair because I said something that annoyed her. I tried to soothe her
by reading the Apocalypse aloud.”
</p>

<p>
“What?” exclaimed the prince, thinking he had not heard aright.
</p>

<p>
“By reading the Apocalypse. The lady has a restless imagination, he-he!
She has a liking for conversation on serious subjects, of any kind; in fact
they please her so much, that it flatters her to discuss them. Now for fifteen
years at least I have studied the Apocalypse, and she agrees with me in
thinking that the present is the epoch represented by the third horse, the
black one whose rider holds a measure in his hand. It seems to me that
everything is ruled by measure in our century; all men are clamouring for their
rights; ‘a measure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for
a penny.’ But, added to this, men desire freedom of mind and body, a pure
heart, a healthy life, and all God’s good gifts. Now by pleading their
rights alone, they will never attain all this, so the white horse, with his
rider Death, comes next, and is followed by Hell. We talked about this matter
when we met, and it impressed her very much.”
</p>

<p>
“Do you believe all this?” asked Muishkin, looking curiously at his
companion.
</p>

<p>
“I both believe it and explain it. I am but a poor creature, a beggar, an
atom in the scale of humanity. Who has the least respect for Lebedeff? He is a
target for all the world, the butt of any fool who chooses to kick him. But in
interpreting revelation I am the equal of anyone, great as he may be! Such is
the power of the mind and the spirit. I have made a lordly personage tremble,
as he sat in his armchair... only by talking to him of things concerning the
spirit. Two years ago, on Easter Eve, His Excellency Nil Alexeyovitch, whose
subordinate I was then, wished to hear what I had to say, and sent a message by
Peter Zakkaritch to ask me to go to his private room. ‘They tell me you
expound the prophecies relating to Antichrist,’ said he, when we were
alone. ‘Is that so?’ ‘Yes,’ I answered unhesitatingly,
and I began to give some comments on the Apostle’s allegorical vision. At
first he smiled, but when we reached the numerical computations and
correspondences, he trembled, and turned pale. Then he begged me to close the
book, and sent me away, promising to put my name on the reward list. That took
place as I said on the eve of Easter, and eight days later his soul returned to
God.”
</p>

<p>
“What?”
</p>

<p>
“It is the truth. One evening after dinner he stumbled as he stepped out
of his carriage. He fell, and struck his head on the curb, and died
immediately. He was seventy-three years of age, and had a red face, and white
hair; he deluged himself with scent, and was always smiling like a child. Peter
Zakkaritch recalled my interview with him, and said, ‘<i>you foretold his
death.</i>’”
</p>

<p>
The prince rose from his seat, and Lebedeff, surprised to see his guest
preparing to go so soon, remarked: “You are not interested?” in a
respectful tone.
</p>

<p>
“I am not very well, and my head aches. Doubtless the effect of the
journey,” replied the prince, frowning.
</p>

<p>
“You should go into the country,” said Lebedeff timidly.
</p>

<p>
The prince seemed to be considering the suggestion.
</p>

<p>
“You see, I am going into the country myself in three days, with my
children and belongings. The little one is delicate; she needs change of air;
and during our absence this house will be done up. I am going to
Pavlofsk.”
</p>

<p>
“You are going to Pavlofsk too?” asked the prince sharply.
“Everybody seems to be going there. Have you a house in that
neighbourhood?”
</p>

<p>
“I don’t know of many people going to Pavlofsk, and as for the
house, Ivan Ptitsin has let me one of his villas rather cheaply. It is a
pleasant place, lying on a hill surrounded by trees, and one can live there for
a mere song. There is good music to be heard, so no wonder it is popular. I
shall stay in the lodge. As to the villa itself...”
</p>

<p>
“Have you let it?”
</p>

<p>
“N-no—not exactly.”
</p>

<p>
“Let it to me,” said the prince.
</p>

<p>
Now this was precisely what Lebedeff had made up his mind to do in the last
three minutes. Not that he had any difficulty in finding a tenant; in fact the
house was occupied at present by a chance visitor, who had told Lebedeff that
he would perhaps take it for the summer months. The clerk knew very well that
this “<i>perhaps</i>” meant “<i>certainly</i>,” but as
he thought he could make more out of a tenant like the prince, he felt
justified in speaking vaguely about the present inhabitant’s intentions.
“This is quite a coincidence,” thought he, and when the subject of
price was mentioned, he made a gesture with his hand, as if to waive away a
question of so little importance.
</p>

<p>
“Oh well, as you like!” said Muishkin. “I will think it over.
You shall lose nothing!”
</p>

<p>
They were walking slowly across the garden.
</p>

<p>
“But if you... I could...” stammered Lebedeff, “if... if you
please, prince, tell you something on the subject which would interest you, I
am sure.” He spoke in wheedling tones, and wriggled as he walked along.
</p>

<p>
Muishkin stopped short.
</p>

<p>
“Daria Alexeyevna also has a villa at Pavlofsk.”
</p>

<p>
“Well?”
</p>

<p>
“A certain person is very friendly with her, and intends to visit her
pretty often.”
</p>

<p>
“Well?”
</p>

<p>
“Aglaya Ivanovna...”
</p>

<p>
“Oh stop, Lebedeff!” interposed Muishkin, feeling as if he had been
touched on an open wound. “That... that has nothing to do with me. I
should like to know when you are going to start. The sooner the better as far
as I am concerned, for I am at an hotel.”
</p>

<p>
They had left the garden now, and were crossing the yard on their way to the
gate.
</p>

<p>
“Well, leave your hotel at once and come here; then we can all go
together to Pavlofsk the day after tomorrow.”
</p>

<p>
“I will think about it,” said the prince dreamily, and went off.
</p>

<p>
The clerk stood looking after his guest, struck by his sudden
absent-mindedness. He had not even remembered to say goodbye, and Lebedeff was
the more surprised at the omission, as he knew by experience how courteous the
prince usually was.
</p>

<h3>III.</h3>

<p>
It was now close on twelve o’clock.
</p>

<p>
The prince knew that if he called at the Epanchins’ now he would only
find the general, and that the latter might probably carry him straight off to
Pavlofsk with him; whereas there was one visit he was most anxious to make
without delay.
</p>

<p>
So at the risk of missing General Epanchin altogether, and thus postponing his
visit to Pavlofsk for a day, at least, the prince decided to go and look for
the house he desired to find.
</p>

<p>
The visit he was about to pay was, in some respects, a risky one. He was in two
minds about it, but knowing that the house was in the Gorohovaya, not far from
the Sadovaya, he determined to go in that direction, and to try to make up his
mind on the way.
</p>

<p>
Arrived at the point where the Gorohovaya crosses the Sadovaya, he was
surprised to find how excessively agitated he was. He had no idea that his
heart could beat so painfully.
</p>

<p>
One house in the Gorohovaya began to attract his attention long before he
reached it, and the prince remembered afterwards that he had said to himself:
“That is the house, I’m sure of it.” He came up to it quite
curious to discover whether he had guessed right, and felt that he would be
disagreeably impressed to find that he had actually done so. The house was a
large gloomy-looking structure, without the slightest claim to architectural
beauty, in colour a dirty green. There are a few of these old houses, built
towards the end of the last century, still standing in that part of St.
Petersburg, and showing little change from their original form and colour. They
are solidly built, and are remarkable for the thickness of their walls, and for
the fewness of their windows, many of which are covered by gratings. On the
ground-floor there is usually a money-changer’s shop, and the owner lives
over it. Without as well as within, the houses seem inhospitable and
mysterious—an impression which is difficult to explain, unless it has
something to do with the actual architectural style. These houses are almost
exclusively inhabited by the merchant class.
</p>

<p>
Arrived at the gate, the prince looked up at the legend over it, which ran:
</p>

<p>
“House of Rogojin, hereditary and honourable citizen.”
</p>

<p>
He hesitated no longer; but opened the glazed door at the bottom of the outer
stairs and made his way up to the second storey. The place was dark and
gloomy-looking; the walls of the stone staircase were painted a dull red.
Rogojin and his mother and brother occupied the whole of the second floor. The
servant who opened the door to Muishkin led him, without taking his name,
through several rooms and up and down many steps until they arrived at a door,
where he knocked.
</p>

<p>
Parfen Rogojin opened the door himself.
</p>

<p>
On seeing the prince he became deadly white, and apparently fixed to the
ground, so that he was more like a marble statue than a human being. The prince
had expected some surprise, but Rogojin evidently considered his visit an
impossible and miraculous event. He stared with an expression almost of terror,
and his lips twisted into a bewildered smile.
</p>

<p>
“Parfen! perhaps my visit is ill-timed. I—I can go away again if
you like,” said Muishkin at last, rather embarrassed.
</p>

<p>
“No, no; it’s all right, come in,” said Parfen, recollecting
himself.
</p>

<p>
They were evidently on quite familiar terms. In Moscow they had had many
occasions of meeting; indeed, some few of those meetings were but too vividly
impressed upon their memories. They had not met now, however, for three months.
</p>

<p>
The deathlike pallor, and a sort of slight convulsion about the lips, had not
left Rogojin’s face. Though he welcomed his guest, he was still obviously
much disturbed. As he invited the prince to sit down near the table, the latter
happened to turn towards him, and was startled by the strange expression on his
face. A painful recollection flashed into his mind. He stood for a time,
looking straight at Rogojin, whose eyes seemed to blaze like fire. At last
Rogojin smiled, though he still looked agitated and shaken.
</p>

<p>
“What are you staring at me like that for?” he muttered. “Sit
down.”
</p>

<p>
The prince took a chair.
</p>

<p>
“Parfen,” he said, “tell me honestly, did you know that I was
coming to Petersburg or no?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, I supposed you were coming,” the other replied, smiling
sarcastically, “and I was right in my supposition, you see; but how was I
to know that you would come <i>today?</i>”
</p>

<p>
A certain strangeness and impatience in his manner impressed the prince very
forcibly.
</p>

<p>
“And if you had known that I was coming today, why be so irritated about
it?” he asked, in quiet surprise.
</p>

<p>
“Why did you ask me?”
</p>

<p>
“Because when I jumped out of the train this morning, two eyes glared at
me just as yours did a moment since.”
</p>

<p>
“Ha! and whose eyes may they have been?” said Rogojin,
suspiciously. It seemed to the prince that he was trembling.
</p>

<p>
“I don’t know; I thought it was a hallucination. I often have
hallucinations nowadays. I feel just as I did five years ago when my fits were
about to come on.”
</p>

<p>
“Well, perhaps it was a hallucination, I don’t know,” said
Parfen.
</p>

<p>
He tried to give the prince an affectionate smile, and it seemed to the latter
as though in this smile of his something had broken, and that he could not mend
it, try as he would.
</p>

<p>
“Shall you go abroad again then?” he asked, and suddenly added,
“Do you remember how we came up in the train from Pskoff together? You
and your cloak and leggings, eh?”
</p>

<p>
And Rogojin burst out laughing, this time with unconcealed malice, as though he
were glad that he had been able to find an opportunity for giving vent to it.
</p>

<p>
“Have you quite taken up your quarters here?” asked the prince
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I’m at home. Where else should I go to?”
</p>

<p>
“We haven’t met for some time. Meanwhile I have heard things about
you which I should not have believed to be possible.”
</p>

<p>
“What of that? People will say anything,” said Rogojin drily.
</p>

<p>
“At all events, you’ve disbanded your troop—and you are
living in your own house instead of being fast and loose about the place;
that’s all very good. Is this house all yours, or joint property?”
</p>

<p>
“It is my mother’s. You get to her apartments by that
passage.”
</p>

<p>
“Where’s your brother?”
</p>

<p>
“In the other wing.”
</p>

<p>
“Is he married?”
</p>

<p>
“Widower. Why do you want to know all this?”
</p>

<p>
The prince looked at him, but said nothing. He had suddenly relapsed into
musing, and had probably not heard the question at all. Rogojin did not insist
upon an answer, and there was silence for a few moments.
</p>

<p>
“I guessed which was your house from a hundred yards off,” said the
prince at last.
</p>

<p>
“Why so?”
</p>

<p>
“I don’t quite know. Your house has the aspect of yourself and all
your family; it bears the stamp of the Rogojin life; but ask me why I think so,
and I can tell you nothing. It is nonsense, of course. I am nervous about this
kind of thing troubling me so much. I had never before imagined what sort of a
house you would live in, and yet no sooner did I set eyes on this one than I
said to myself that it must be yours.”
</p>

<p>
“Really!” said Rogojin vaguely, not taking in what the prince meant
by his rather obscure remarks.
</p>

<p>
The room they were now sitting in was a large one, lofty but dark, well
furnished, principally with writing-tables and desks covered with papers and
books. A wide sofa covered with red morocco evidently served Rogojin for a bed.
On the table beside which the prince had been invited to seat himself lay some
books; one containing a marker where the reader had left off, was a volume of
Solovieff’s History. Some oil-paintings in worn gilded frames hung on the
walls, but it was impossible to make out what subjects they represented, so
blackened were they by smoke and age. One, a life-sized portrait, attracted the
prince’s attention. It showed a man of about fifty, wearing a long
riding-coat of German cut. He had two medals on his breast; his beard was
white, short and thin; his face yellow and wrinkled, with a sly, suspicious
expression in the eyes.
</p>

<p>
“That is your father, is it not?” asked the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, it is,” replied Rogojin with an unpleasant smile, as if he
had expected his guest to ask the question, and then to make some disagreeable
remark.
</p>

<p>
“Was he one of the Old Believers?”
</p>

<p>
“No, he went to church, but to tell the truth he really preferred the old
religion. This was his study and is now mine. Why did you ask if he were an Old
Believer?”
</p>

<p>
“Are you going to be married here?”
</p>

<p>
“Ye-yes!” replied Rogojin, starting at the unexpected question.
</p>

<p>
“Soon?”
</p>

<p>
“You know yourself it does not depend on me.”
</p>

<p>
“Parfen, I am not your enemy, and I do not intend to oppose your
intentions in any way. I repeat this to you now just as I said it to you once
before on a very similar occasion. When you were arranging for your projected
marriage in Moscow, I did not interfere with you—you know I did not. That
first time she fled to me from you, from the very altar almost, and begged me
to ‘save her from you.’ Afterwards she ran away from me again, and
you found her and arranged your marriage with her once more; and now, I hear,
she has run away from you and come to Petersburg. Is it true? Lebedeff wrote me
to this effect, and that’s why I came here. That you had once more
arranged matters with Nastasia Philipovna I only learned last night in the
train from a friend of yours, Zaleshoff—if you wish to know.
</p>

<p>
“I confess I came here with an object. I wished to persuade Nastasia to
go abroad for her health; she requires it. Both mind and body need a change
badly. I did not intend to take her abroad myself. I was going to arrange for
her to go without me. Now I tell you honestly, Parfen, if it is true that all
is made up between you, I will not so much as set eyes upon her, and I will
never even come to see you again.
</p>

<p>
“You know quite well that I am telling the truth, because I have always
been frank with you. I have never concealed my own opinion from you. I have
always told you that I consider a marriage between you and her would be ruin to
her. You would also be ruined, and perhaps even more hopelessly. If this
marriage were to be broken off again, I admit I should be greatly pleased; but
at the same time I have not the slightest intention of trying to part you. You
may be quite easy in your mind, and you need not suspect me. You know yourself
whether I was ever really your rival or not, even when she ran away and came to
me.
</p>

<p>
“There, you are laughing at me—I know why you laugh. It is
perfectly true that we lived apart from one another all the time, in different
towns. I told you before that I did not love her with love, but with pity! You
said then that you understood me; did you really understand me or not? What
hatred there is in your eyes at this moment! I came to relieve your mind,
because you are dear to me also. I love you very much, Parfen; and now I shall
go away and never come back again. Goodbye.”
</p>

<p>
The prince rose.
</p>

<p>
“Stay a little,” said Parfen, not leaving his chair and resting his
head on his right hand. “I haven’t seen you for a long time.”
</p>

<p>
The prince sat down again. Both were silent for a few moments.
</p>

<p>
“When you are not with me I hate you, Lef Nicolaievitch. I have loathed
you every day of these three months since I last saw you. By heaven I
have!” said Rogojin. “I could have poisoned you at any minute. Now,
you have been with me but a quarter of an hour, and all my malice seems to have
melted away, and you are as dear to me as ever. Stay here a little
longer.”
</p>

<p>
“When I am with you you trust me; but as soon as my back is turned you
suspect me,” said the prince, smiling, and trying to hide his emotion.
</p>

<p>
“I trust your voice, when I hear you speak. I quite understand that you
and I cannot be put on a level, of course.”
</p>

<p>
“Why did you add that?—There! Now you are cross again,” said
the prince, wondering.
</p>

<p>
“We were not asked, you see. We were made different, with different
tastes and feelings, without being consulted. You say you love her with pity. I
have no pity for her. She hates me—that’s the plain truth of the
matter. I dream of her every night, and always that she is laughing at me with
another man. And so she does laugh at me. She thinks no more of marrying me
than if she were changing her shoe. Would you believe it, I haven’t seen
her for five days, and I daren’t go near her. She asks me what I come
for, as if she were not content with having disgraced me—”
</p>

<p>
“Disgraced you! How?”
</p>

<p>
“Just as though you didn’t know! Why, she ran away from me, and
went to you. You admitted it yourself, just now.”
</p>

<p>
“But surely you do not believe that she...”
</p>

<p>
“That she did not disgrace me at Moscow with that officer, Zemtuznikoff?
I know for certain she did, after having fixed our marriage-day herself!”
</p>

<p>
“Impossible!” cried the prince.
</p>

<p>
“I know it for a fact,” replied Rogojin, with conviction.
</p>

<p>
“It is not like her, you say? My friend, that’s absurd. Perhaps
such an act would horrify her, if she were with you, but it is quite different
where I am concerned. She looks on me as vermin. Her affair with Keller was
simply to make a laughing-stock of me. You don’t know what a fool she
made of me in Moscow; and the money I spent over her! The money! the
money!”
</p>

<p>
“And you can marry her now, Parfen! What will come of it all?” said
the prince, with dread in his voice.
</p>

<p>
Rogojin gazed back gloomily, and with a terrible expression in his eyes, but
said nothing.
</p>

<p>
“I haven’t been to see her for five days,” he repeated, after
a slight pause. “I’m afraid of being turned out. She says
she’s still her own mistress, and may turn me off altogether, and go
abroad. She told me this herself,” he said, with a peculiar glance at
Muishkin. “I think she often does it merely to frighten me. She is always
laughing at me, for some reason or other; but at other times she’s angry,
and won’t say a word, and that’s what I’m afraid of. I took
her a shawl one day, the like of which she might never have seen, although she
did live in luxury and she gave it away to her maid, Katia. Sometimes when I
can keep away no longer, I steal past the house on the sly, and once I watched
at the gate till dawn—I thought something was going on—and she saw
me from the window. She asked me what I should do if I found she had deceived
me. I said, ‘You know well enough.’”
</p>

<p>
“What did she know?” cried the prince.
</p>

<p>
“How was I to tell?” replied Rogojin, with an angry laugh. “I
did my best to catch her tripping in Moscow, but did not succeed. However, I
caught hold of her one day, and said: ‘You are engaged to be married into
a respectable family, and do you know what sort of a woman you are?
<i>That’s</i> the sort of woman you are,’ I said.”
</p>

<p>
“You told her that?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes.”
</p>

<p>
“Well, go on.”
</p>

<p>
“She said, ‘I wouldn’t even have you for a footman now, much
less for a husband.’ ‘I shan’t leave the house,’ I
said, ‘so it doesn’t matter.’ ‘Then I shall call
somebody and have you kicked out,’ she cried. So then I rushed at her,
and beat her till she was bruised all over.”
</p>

<p>
“Impossible!” cried the prince, aghast.
</p>

<p>
“I tell you it’s true,” said Rogojin quietly, but with eyes
ablaze with passion.
</p>

<p>
“Then for a day and a half I neither slept, nor ate, nor drank, and would
not leave her. I knelt at her feet: ‘I shall die here,’ I said,
‘if you don’t forgive me; and if you have me turned out, I shall
drown myself; because, what should I be without you now?’ She was like a
madwoman all that day; now she would cry; now she would threaten me with a
knife; now she would abuse me. She called in Zaleshoff and Keller, and showed
me to them, shamed me in their presence. ‘Let’s all go to the
theatre,’ she says, ‘and leave him here if he won’t
go—it’s not my business. They’ll give you some tea, Parfen
Semeonovitch, while I am away, for you must be hungry.’ She came back
from the theatre alone. ‘Those cowards wouldn’t come,’ she
said. ‘They are afraid of you, and tried to frighten me, too. “He
won’t go away as he came,” they said, “he’ll cut your
throat—see if he doesn’t.” Now, I shall go to my bedroom, and
I shall not even lock my door, just to show you how much I am afraid of you.
You must be shown that once for all. Did you have tea?’ ‘No,’
I said, ‘and I don’t intend to.’ ‘Ha, ha! you are
playing off your pride against your stomach! That sort of heroism doesn’t
sit well on you,’ she said.
</p>

<p>
“With that she did as she had said she would; she went to bed, and did
not lock her door. In the morning she came out. ‘Are you quite
mad?’ she said, sharply. ‘Why, you’ll die of hunger like
this.’ ‘Forgive me,’ I said. ‘No, I won’t, and I
won’t marry you. I’ve said it. Surely you haven’t sat in this
chair all night without sleeping?’ ‘I didn’t sleep,’ I
said. ‘H’m! how sensible of you. And are you going to have no
breakfast or dinner today?’ ‘I told you I wouldn’t. Forgive
me!’ ‘You’ve no idea how unbecoming this sort of thing is to
you,’ she said, ‘it’s like putting a saddle on a cow’s
back. Do you think you are frightening me? My word, what a dreadful thing that
you should sit here and eat no food! How terribly frightened I am!’ She
wasn’t angry long, and didn’t seem to remember my offence at all. I
was surprised, for she is a vindictive, resentful woman—but then I
thought that perhaps she despised me too much to feel any resentment against
me. And that’s the truth.
</p>

<p>
“She came up to me and said, ‘Do you know who the Pope of Rome
is?’ ‘I’ve heard of him,’ I said. ‘I suppose
you’ve read the Universal History, Parfen Semeonovitch, haven’t
you?’ she asked. ‘I’ve learned nothing at all,’ I said.
‘Then I’ll lend it to you to read. You must know there was a Roman
Pope once, and he was very angry with a certain Emperor; so the Emperor came
and neither ate nor drank, but knelt before the Pope’s palace till he
should be forgiven. And what sort of vows do you think that Emperor was making
during all those days on his knees? Stop, I’ll read it to you!’
Then she read me a lot of verses, where it said that the Emperor spent all the
time vowing vengeance against the Pope. ‘You don’t mean to say you
don’t approve of the poem, Parfen Semeonovitch,’ she says.
‘All you have read out is perfectly true,’ say I.
‘Aha!’ says she, ‘you admit it’s true, do you? And you
are making vows to yourself that if I marry you, you will remind me of all
this, and take it out of me.’ ‘I don’t know,’ I say,
‘perhaps I was thinking like that, and perhaps I was not. I’m not
thinking of anything just now.’ ‘What are your thoughts,
then?’ ‘I’m thinking that when you rise from your chair and
go past me, I watch you, and follow you with my eyes; if your dress does but
rustle, my heart sinks; if you leave the room, I remember every little word and
action, and what your voice sounded like, and what you said. I thought of
nothing all last night, but sat here listening to your sleeping breath, and
heard you move a little, twice.’ ‘And as for your attack upon
me,’ she says, ‘I suppose you never once thought of
<i>that?</i>’ ‘Perhaps I did think of it, and perhaps not,’ I
say. ‘And what if I don’t either forgive you or marry, you?’
‘I tell you I shall go and drown myself.’ ‘H’m!’
she said, and then relapsed into silence. Then she got angry, and went out.
‘I suppose you’d murder me before you drowned yourself,
though!’ she cried as she left the room.
</p>

<p>
“An hour later, she came to me again, looking melancholy. ‘I will
marry you, Parfen Semeonovitch,’ she says, not because I’m
frightened of you, but because it’s all the same to me how I ruin myself.
And how can I do it better? Sit down; they’ll bring you some dinner
directly. And if I do marry you, I’ll be a faithful wife to you—you
need not doubt that.’ Then she thought a bit, and said, ‘At all
events, you are not a flunkey; at first, I thought you were no better than a
flunkey.’ And she arranged the wedding and fixed the day straight away on
the spot.
</p>

<p>
“Then, in another week, she had run away again, and came here to
Lebedeff’s; and when I found her here, she said to me, ‘I’m
not going to renounce you altogether, but I wish to put off the wedding a bit
longer yet—just as long as I like—for I am still my own mistress;
so you may wait, if you like.’ That’s how the matter stands between
us now. What do you think of all this, Lef Nicolaievitch?”
</p>

<p>
“‘What do you think of it yourself?” replied the prince,
looking sadly at Rogojin.
</p>

<p>
“As if I can think anything about it! I—” He was about to say
more, but stopped in despair.
</p>

<p>
The prince rose again, as if he would leave.
</p>

<p>
“At all events, I shall not interfere with you!” he murmured, as
though making answer to some secret thought of his own.
</p>

<p>
“I’ll tell you what!” cried Rogojin, and his eyes flashed
fire. “I can’t understand your yielding her to me like this; I
don’t understand it. Have you given up loving her altogether? At first
you suffered badly—I know it—I saw it. Besides, why did you come
post-haste after us? Out of pity, eh? He, he, he!” His mouth curved in a
mocking smile.
</p>

<p>
“Do you think I am deceiving you?” asked the prince.
</p>

<p>
“No! I trust you—but I can’t understand. It seems to me that
your pity is greater than my love.” A hungry longing to speak his mind
out seemed to flash in the man’s eyes, combined with an intense anger.
</p>

<p>
“Your love is mingled with hatred, and therefore, when your love passes,
there will be the greater misery,” said the prince. “I tell you
this, Parfen—”
</p>

<p>
“What! that I’ll cut her throat, you mean?”
</p>

<p>
The prince shuddered.
</p>

<p>
“You’ll hate her afterwards for all your present love, and for all
the torment you are suffering on her account now. What seems to me the most
extraordinary thing is, that she can again consent to marry you, after all that
has passed between you. When I heard the news yesterday, I could hardly bring
myself to believe it. Why, she has run twice from you, from the very altar
rails, as it were. She must have some presentiment of evil. What can she want
with you now? Your money? Nonsense! Besides, I should think you must have made
a fairly large hole in your fortune already. Surely it is not because she is so
very anxious to find a husband? She could find many a one besides yourself.
Anyone would be better than you, because you will murder her, and I feel sure
she must know that but too well by now. Is it because you love her so
passionately? Indeed, that may be it. I have heard that there are women who
want just that kind of love... but still...” The prince paused,
reflectively.
</p>

<p>
“What are you grinning at my father’s portrait again for?”
asked Rogojin, suddenly. He was carefully observing every change in the
expression of the prince’s face.
</p>

<p>
“I smiled because the idea came into my head that if it were not for this
unhappy passion of yours you might have, and would have, become just such a man
as your father, and that very quickly, too. You’d have settled down in
this house of yours with some silent and obedient wife. You would have spoken
rarely, trusted no one, heeded no one, and thought of nothing but making
money.”
</p>

<p>
“Laugh away! She said exactly the same, almost word for word, when she
saw my father’s portrait. It’s remarkable how entirely you and she
are at one now-a-days.”
</p>

<p>
“What, has she been here?” asked the prince with curiosity.
</p>

<p>
“Yes! She looked long at the portrait and asked all about my father.
‘You’d be just such another,’ she said at last, and laughed.
‘You have such strong passions, Parfen,’ she said, ‘that
they’d have taken you to Siberia in no time if you had not, luckily,
intelligence as well. For you have a good deal of intelligence.’ (She
said this—believe it or not. The first time I ever heard anything of that
sort from her.) ‘You’d soon have thrown up all this rowdyism that
you indulge in now, and you’d have settled down to quiet, steady
money-making, because you have little education; and here you’d have
stayed just like your father before you. And you’d have loved your money
so that you’d amass not two million, like him, but ten million; and
you’d have died of hunger on your money bags to finish up with, for you
carry everything to extremes.’ There, that’s exactly word for word
as she said it to me. She never talked to me like that before. She always talks
nonsense and laughs when she’s with me. We went all over this old house
together. ‘I shall change all this,’ I said, ‘or else
I’ll buy a new house for the wedding.’ ‘No, no!’ she
said, ‘don’t touch anything; leave it all as it is; I shall live
with your mother when I marry you.’
</p>

<p>
“I took her to see my mother, and she was as respectful and kind as
though she were her own daughter. Mother has been almost demented ever since
father died—she’s an old woman. She sits and bows from her chair to
everyone she sees. If you left her alone and didn’t feed her for three
days, I don’t believe she would notice it. Well, I took her hand, and I
said, ‘Give your blessing to this lady, mother, she’s going to be
my wife.’ So Nastasia kissed mother’s hand with great feeling.
‘She must have suffered terribly, hasn’t she?’ she said. She
saw this book here lying before me. ‘What! have you begun to read Russian
history?’ she asked. She told me once in Moscow, you know, that I had
better get Solovieff’s Russian History and read it, because I knew
nothing. ‘That’s good,’ she said, ‘you go on like that,
reading books. I’ll make you a list myself of the books you ought to read
first—shall I?’ She had never once spoken to me like this before;
it was the first time I felt I could breathe before her like a living
creature.”
</p>

<p>
“I’m very, very glad to hear of this, Parfen,” said the
prince, with real feeling. “Who knows? Maybe God will yet bring you near
to one another.”
</p>

<p>
“Never, never!” cried Rogojin, excitedly.
</p>

<p>
“Look here, Parfen; if you love her so much, surely you must be anxious
to earn her respect? And if you do so wish, surely you may hope to? I said just
now that I considered it extraordinary that she could still be ready to marry
you. Well, though I cannot yet understand it, I feel sure she must have some
good reason, or she wouldn’t do it. She is sure of your love; but besides
that, she must attribute <i>something</i> else to you—some good
qualities, otherwise the thing would not be. What you have just said confirms
my words. You say yourself that she found it possible to speak to you quite
differently from her usual manner. You are suspicious, you know, and jealous,
therefore when anything annoying happens to you, you exaggerate its
significance. Of course, of course, she does not think so ill of you as you
say. Why, if she did, she would simply be walking to death by drowning or by
the knife, with her eyes wide open, when she married you. It is impossible! As
if anybody would go to their death deliberately!”
</p>

<p>
Rogojin listened to the prince’s excited words with a bitter smile. His
conviction was, apparently, unalterable.
</p>

<p>
“How dreadfully you look at me, Parfen!” said the prince, with a
feeling of dread.
</p>

<p>
“Water or the knife?” said the latter, at last. “Ha,
ha—that’s exactly why she is going to marry me, because she knows
for certain that the knife awaits her. Prince, can it be that you don’t
even yet see what’s at the root of it all?”
</p>

<p>
“I don’t understand you.”
</p>

<p>
“Perhaps he really doesn’t understand me! They do say that you are
a—you know what! She loves another—there, you can understand that
much! Just as I love her, exactly so she loves another man. And that other man
is—do you know who? It’s you. There—you didn’t know
that, eh?”
</p>

<p>
“I?”
</p>

<p>
“You, you! She has loved you ever since that day, her birthday! Only she
thinks she cannot marry you, because it would be the ruin of you.
‘Everybody knows what sort of a woman I am,’ she says. She told me
all this herself, to my very face! She’s afraid of disgracing and ruining
you, she says, but it doesn’t matter about me. She can marry me all
right! Notice how much consideration she shows for me!”
</p>

<p>
“But why did she run away to me, and then again from me to—”
</p>

<p>
“From you to me? Ha, ha! that’s nothing! Why, she always acts as
though she were in a delirium now-a-days! Either she says, ‘Come on,
I’ll marry you! Let’s have the wedding quickly!’ and fixes
the day, and seems in a hurry for it, and when it begins to come near she feels
frightened; or else some other idea gets into her head—goodness knows!
you’ve seen her—you know how she goes on—laughing and crying
and raving! There’s nothing extraordinary about her having run away from
you! She ran away because she found out how dearly she loved you. She could not
bear to be near you. You said just now that I had found her at Moscow, when she
ran away from you. I didn’t do anything of the sort; she came to me
herself, straight from you. ‘Name the day—I’m ready!’
she said. ‘Let’s have some champagne, and go and hear the gipsies
sing!’ I tell you she’d have thrown herself into the water long ago
if it were not for me! She doesn’t do it because I am, perhaps, even more
dreadful to her than the water! She’s marrying me out of spite; if she
marries me, I tell you, it will be for spite!”
</p>

<p>
“But how do you, how can you—” began the prince, gazing with
dread and horror at Rogojin.
</p>

<p>
“Why don’t you finish your sentence? Shall I tell you what you were
thinking to yourself just then? You were thinking, ‘How can she marry him
after this? How can it possibly be permitted?’ Oh, I know what you were
thinking about!”
</p>

<p>
“I didn’t come here for that purpose, Parfen. That was not in my
mind—”
</p>

<p>
“That may be! Perhaps you didn’t <i>come</i> with the idea, but the
idea is certainly there <i>now!</i> Ha, ha! well, that’s enough! What are
you upset about? Didn’t you really know it all before? You astonish
me!”
</p>

<p>
“All this is mere jealousy—it is some malady of yours, Parfen! You
exaggerate everything,” said the prince, excessively agitated.
“What are you doing?”
</p>

<p>
“Let go of it!” said Parfen, seizing from the prince’s hand a
knife which the latter had at that moment taken up from the table, where it lay
beside the history. Parfen replaced it where it had been.
</p>

<p>
“I seemed to know it—I felt it, when I was coming back to
Petersburg,” continued the prince, “I did not want to come, I
wished to forget all this, to uproot it from my memory altogether! Well,
good-bye—what is the matter?”
</p>

<p>
He had absently taken up the knife a second time, and again Rogojin snatched it
from his hand, and threw it down on the table. It was a plain looking knife,
with a bone handle, a blade about eight inches long, and broad in proportion,
it did not clasp.
</p>

<p>
Seeing that the prince was considerably struck by the fact that he had twice
seized this knife out of his hand, Rogojin caught it up with some irritation,
put it inside the book, and threw the latter across to another table.
</p>

<p>
“Do you cut your pages with it, or what?” asked Muishkin, still
rather absently, as though unable to throw off a deep preoccupation into which
the conversation had thrown him.
</p>

<p>
“Yes.”
</p>

<p>
“It’s a garden knife, isn’t it?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes. Can’t one cut pages with a garden knife?”
</p>

<p>
“It’s quite new.”
</p>

<p>
“Well, what of that? Can’t I buy a new knife if I like?”
shouted Rogojin furiously, his irritation growing with every word.
</p>

<p>
The prince shuddered, and gazed fixedly at Parfen. Suddenly he burst out
laughing.
</p>

<p>
“Why, what an idea!” he said. “I didn’t mean to ask you
any of these questions; I was thinking of something quite different! But my
head is heavy, and I seem so absent-minded nowadays! Well, good-bye—I
can’t remember what I wanted to say—good-bye!”
</p>

<p>
“Not that way,” said Rogojin.
</p>

<p>
“There, I’ve forgotten that too!”
</p>

<p>
“This way—come along—I’ll show you.”
</p>

<h3>IV.</h3>

<p>
They passed through the same rooms which the prince had traversed on his
arrival. In the largest there were pictures on the walls, portraits and
landscapes of little interest. Over the door, however, there was one of strange
and rather striking shape; it was six or seven feet in length, and not more
than a foot in height. It represented the Saviour just taken from the cross.
</p>

<p>
The prince glanced at it, but took no further notice. He moved on hastily, as
though anxious to get out of the house. But Rogojin suddenly stopped underneath
the picture.
</p>

<p>
“My father picked up all these pictures very cheap at auctions, and so
on,” he said; “they are all rubbish, except the one over the door,
and that is valuable. A man offered five hundred roubles for it last
week.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes—that’s a copy of a Holbein,” said the prince,
looking at it again, “and a good copy, too, so far as I am able to judge.
I saw the picture abroad, and could not forget it—what’s the
matter?”
</p>

<p>
Rogojin had dropped the subject of the picture and walked on. Of course his
strange frame of mind was sufficient to account for his conduct; but, still, it
seemed queer to the prince that he should so abruptly drop a conversation
commenced by himself. Rogojin did not take any notice of his question.
</p>

<p>
“Lef Nicolaievitch,” said Rogojin, after a pause, during which the
two walked along a little further, “I have long wished to ask you, do you
believe in God?”
</p>

<p>
“How strangely you speak, and how odd you look!” said the other,
involuntarily.
</p>

<p>
“I like looking at that picture,” muttered Rogojin, not noticing,
apparently, that the prince had not answered his question.
</p>

<p>
“That picture! That picture!” cried Muishkin, struck by a sudden
idea. “Why, a man’s faith might be ruined by looking at that
picture!”
</p>

<p>
“So it is!” said Rogojin, unexpectedly. They had now reached the
front door.
</p>

<p>
The prince stopped.
</p>

<p>
“How?” he said. “What do you mean? I was half joking, and you
took me up quite seriously! Why do you ask me whether I believe in God?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, no particular reason. I meant to ask you before—many people
are unbelievers nowadays, especially Russians, I have been told. You ought to
know—you’ve lived abroad.”
</p>

<p>
Rogojin laughed bitterly as he said these words, and opening the door, held it
for the prince to pass out. Muishkin looked surprised, but went out. The other
followed him as far as the landing of the outer stairs, and shut the door
behind him. They both now stood facing one another, as though oblivious of
where they were, or what they had to do next.
</p>

<p>
“Well, good-bye!” said the prince, holding out his hand.
</p>

<p>
“Good-bye,” said Rogojin, pressing it hard, but quite mechanically.
</p>

<p>
The prince made one step forward, and then turned round.
</p>

<p>
“As to faith,” he said, smiling, and evidently unwilling to leave
Rogojin in this state—“as to faith, I had four curious
conversations in two days, a week or so ago. One morning I met a man in the
train, and made acquaintance with him at once. I had often heard of him as a
very learned man, but an atheist; and I was very glad of the opportunity of
conversing with so eminent and clever a person. He doesn’t believe in
God, and he talked a good deal about it, but all the while it appeared to me
that he was speaking <i>outside the subject</i>. And it has always struck me,
both in speaking to such men and in reading their books, that they do not seem
really to be touching on that at all, though on the surface they may appear to
do so. I told him this, but I dare say I did not clearly express what I meant,
for he could not understand me.
</p>

<p>
“That same evening I stopped at a small provincial hotel, and it so
happened that a dreadful murder had been committed there the night before, and
everybody was talking about it. Two peasants—elderly men and old
friends—had had tea together there the night before, and were to occupy
the same bedroom. They were not drunk but one of them had noticed for the first
time that his friend possessed a silver watch which he was wearing on a chain.
He was by no means a thief, and was, as peasants go, a rich man; but this watch
so fascinated him that he could not restrain himself. He took a knife, and when
his friend turned his back, he came up softly behind, raised his eyes to
heaven, crossed himself, and saying earnestly—‘God forgive me, for
Christ’s sake!’ he cut his friend’s throat like a sheep, and
took the watch.”
</p>

<p>
Rogojin roared with laughter. He laughed as though he were in a sort of fit. It
was strange to see him laughing so after the sombre mood he had been in just
before.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, I like that! That beats anything!” he cried convulsively,
panting for breath. “One is an absolute unbeliever; the other is such a
thorough-going believer that he murders his friend to the tune of a prayer! Oh,
prince, prince, that’s too good for anything! You can’t have
invented it. It’s the best thing I’ve heard!”
</p>

<p>
“Next morning I went out for a stroll through the town,” continued
the prince, so soon as Rogojin was a little quieter, though his laughter still
burst out at intervals, “and soon observed a drunken-looking soldier
staggering about the pavement. He came up to me and said, ‘Buy my silver
cross, sir! You shall have it for fourpence—it’s real
silver.’ I looked, and there he held a cross, just taken off his own
neck, evidently, a large tin one, made after the Byzantine pattern. I fished
out fourpence, and put his cross on my own neck, and I could see by his face
that he was as pleased as he could be at the thought that he had succeeded in
cheating a foolish gentleman, and away he went to drink the value of his cross.
At that time everything that I saw made a tremendous impression upon me. I had
understood nothing about Russia before, and had only vague and fantastic
memories of it. So I thought, ‘I will wait awhile before I condemn this
Judas. Only God knows what may be hidden in the hearts of drunkards.’
</p>

<p>
“Well, I went homewards, and near the hotel I came across a poor woman,
carrying a child—a baby of some six weeks old. The mother was quite a
girl herself. The baby was smiling up at her, for the first time in its life,
just at that moment; and while I watched the woman she suddenly crossed
herself, oh, so devoutly! ‘What is it, my good woman?’ I asked her.
(I was never but asking questions then!) ‘Exactly as is a mother’s
joy when her baby smiles for the first time into her eyes, so is God’s
joy when one of His children turns and prays to Him for the first time, with
all his heart!’ This is what that poor woman said to me, almost word for
word; and such a deep, refined, truly religious thought it was—a thought
in which the whole essence of Christianity was expressed in one
flash—that is, the recognition of God as our Father, and of God’s
joy in men as His own children, which is the chief idea of Christ. She was a
simple country-woman—a mother, it’s true—and perhaps, who
knows, she may have been the wife of the drunken soldier!
</p>

<p>
“Listen, Parfen; you put a question to me just now. This is my reply. The
essence of religious feeling has nothing to do with reason, or atheism, or
crime, or acts of any kind—it has nothing to do with these
things—and never had. There is something besides all this, something
which the arguments of the atheists can never touch. But the principal thing,
and the conclusion of my argument, is that this is most clearly seen in the
heart of a Russian. This is a conviction which I have gained while I have been
in this Russia of ours. Yes, Parfen! there is work to be done; there is work to
be done in this Russian world! Remember what talks we used to have in Moscow!
And I never wished to come here at all; and I never thought to meet you like
this, Parfen! Well, well—good-bye—good-bye! God be with you!”
</p>

<p>
He turned and went downstairs.
</p>

<p>
“Lef Nicolaievitch!” cried Parfen, before he had reached the next
landing. “Have you got that cross you bought from the soldier with
you?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I have,” and the prince stopped again.
</p>

<p>
“Show it me, will you?”
</p>

<p>
A new fancy! The prince reflected, and then mounted the stairs once more. He
pulled out the cross without taking it off his neck.
</p>

<p>
“Give it to me,” said Parfen.
</p>

<p>
“Why? do you—”
</p>

<p>
The prince would rather have kept this particular cross.
</p>

<p>
“I’ll wear it; and you shall have mine. I’ll take it off at
once.”
</p>

<p>
“You wish to exchange crosses? Very well, Parfen, if that’s the
case, I’m glad enough—that makes us brothers, you know.”
</p>

<p>
The prince took off his tin cross, Parfen his gold one, and the exchange was
made.
</p>

<p>
Parfen was silent. With sad surprise the prince observed that the look of
distrust, the bitter, ironical smile, had still not altogether left his
newly-adopted brother’s face. At moments, at all events, it showed itself
but too plainly,
</p>

<p>
At last Rogojin took the prince’s hand, and stood so for some moments, as
though he could not make up his mind. Then he drew him along, murmuring almost
inaudibly,
</p>

<p>
“Come!”
</p>

<p>
They stopped on the landing, and rang the bell at a door opposite to
Parfen’s own lodging.
</p>

<p>
An old woman opened to them and bowed low to Parfen, who asked her some
questions hurriedly, but did not wait to hear her answer. He led the prince on
through several dark, cold-looking rooms, spotlessly clean, with white covers
over all the furniture.
</p>

<p>
Without the ceremony of knocking, Parfen entered a small apartment, furnished
like a drawing-room, but with a polished mahogany partition dividing one half
of it from what was probably a bedroom. In one corner of this room sat an old
woman in an arm-chair, close to the stove. She did not look very old, and her
face was a pleasant, round one; but she was white-haired and, as one could
detect at the first glance, quite in her second childhood. She wore a black
woollen dress, with a black handkerchief round her neck and shoulders, and a
white cap with black ribbons. Her feet were raised on a footstool. Beside her
sat another old woman, also dressed in mourning, and silently knitting a
stocking; this was evidently a companion. They both looked as though they never
broke the silence. The first old woman, so soon as she saw Rogojin and the
prince, smiled and bowed courteously several times, in token of her
gratification at their visit.
</p>

<p>
“Mother,” said Rogojin, kissing her hand, “here is my great
friend, Prince Muishkin; we have exchanged crosses; he was like a real brother
to me at Moscow at one time, and did a great deal for me. Bless him, mother, as
you would bless your own son. Wait a moment, let me arrange your hands for
you.”
</p>

<p>
But the old lady, before Parfen had time to touch her, raised her right hand,
and, with three fingers held up, devoutly made the sign of the cross three
times over the prince. She then nodded her head kindly at him once more.
</p>

<p>
“There, come along, Lef Nicolaievitch; that’s all I brought you
here for,” said Rogojin.
</p>

<p>
When they reached the stairs again he added:
</p>

<p>
“She understood nothing of what I said to her, and did not know what I
wanted her to do, and yet she blessed you; that shows she wished to do so
herself. Well, goodbye; it’s time you went, and I must go too.”
</p>

<p>
He opened his own door.
</p>

<p>
“Well, let me at least embrace you and say goodbye, you strange
fellow!” cried the prince, looking with gentle reproach at Rogojin, and
advancing towards him. But the latter had hardly raised his arms when he
dropped them again. He could not make up his mind to it; he turned away from
the prince in order to avoid looking at him. He could not embrace him.
</p>

<p>
“Don’t be afraid,” he muttered, indistinctly, “though I
have taken your cross, I shall not murder you for your watch.” So saying,
he laughed suddenly, and strangely. Then in a moment his face became
transfigured; he grew deadly white, his lips trembled, his eyes burned like
fire. He stretched out his arms and held the prince tightly to him, and said in
a strangled voice:
</p>

<p>
“Well, take her! It’s Fate! She’s yours. I surrender her....
Remember Rogojin!” And pushing the prince from him, without looking back
at him, he hurriedly entered his own flat, and banged the door.
</p>

<h3>V.</h3>

<p>
It was late now, nearly half-past two, and the prince did not find General
Epanchin at home. He left a card, and determined to look up Colia, who had a
room at a small hotel near. Colia was not in, but he was informed that he might
be back shortly, and had left word that if he were not in by half-past three it
was to be understood that he had gone to Pavlofsk to General Epanchin’s,
and would dine there. The prince decided to wait till half-past three, and
ordered some dinner. At half-past three there was no sign of Colia. The prince
waited until four o’clock, and then strolled off mechanically wherever
his feet should carry him.
</p>

<p>
In early summer there are often magnificent days in St.
Petersburg—bright, hot and still. This happened to be such a day.
</p>

<p>
For some time the prince wandered about without aim or object. He did not know
the town well. He stopped to look about him on bridges, at street corners. He
entered a confectioner’s shop to rest, once. He was in a state of nervous
excitement and perturbation; he noticed nothing and no one; and he felt a
craving for solitude, to be alone with his thoughts and his emotions, and to
give himself up to them passively. He loathed the idea of trying to answer the
questions that would rise up in his heart and mind. “I am not to blame
for all this,” he thought to himself, half unconsciously.
</p>

<p>
Towards six o’clock he found himself at the station of the Tsarsko-Selski
railway.
</p>

<p>
He was tired of solitude now; a new rush of feeling took hold of him, and a
flood of light chased away the gloom, for a moment, from his soul. He took a
ticket to Pavlofsk, and determined to get there as fast as he could, but
something stopped him; a reality, and not a fantasy, as he was inclined to
think it. He was about to take his place in a carriage, when he suddenly threw
away his ticket and came out again, disturbed and thoughtful. A few moments
later, in the street, he recalled something that had bothered him all the
afternoon. He caught himself engaged in a strange occupation which he now
recollected he had taken up at odd moments for the last few hours—it was
looking about all around him for something, he did not know what. He had
forgotten it for a while, half an hour or so, and now, suddenly, the uneasy
search had recommenced.
</p>

<p>
But he had hardly become conscious of this curious phenomenon, when another
recollection suddenly swam through his brain, interesting him for the moment,
exceedingly. He remembered that the last time he had been engaged in looking
around him for the unknown something, he was standing before a cutler’s
shop, in the window of which were exposed certain goods for sale. He was
extremely anxious now to discover whether this shop and these goods really
existed, or whether the whole thing had been a hallucination.
</p>

<p>
He felt in a very curious condition today, a condition similar to that which
had preceded his fits in bygone years.
</p>

<p>
He remembered that at such times he had been particularly absentminded, and
could not discriminate between objects and persons unless he concentrated
special attention upon them.
</p>

<p>
He remembered seeing something in the window marked at sixty copecks.
Therefore, if the shop existed and if this object were really in the window, it
would prove that he had been able to concentrate his attention on this article
at a moment when, as a general rule, his absence of mind would have been too
great to admit of any such concentration; in fact, very shortly after he had
left the railway station in such a state of agitation.
</p>

<p>
So he walked back looking about him for the shop, and his heart beat with
intolerable impatience. Ah! here was the very shop, and there was the article
marked “60 cop.” Of course, it’s sixty copecks, he thought,
and certainly worth no more. This idea amused him and he laughed.
</p>

<p>
But it was a hysterical laugh; he was feeling terribly oppressed. He remembered
clearly that just here, standing before this window, he had suddenly turned
round, just as earlier in the day he had turned and found the dreadful eyes of
Rogojin fixed upon him. Convinced, therefore, that in this respect at all
events he had been under no delusion, he left the shop and went on.
</p>

<p>
This must be thought out; it was clear that there had been no hallucination at
the station then, either; something had actually happened to him, on both
occasions; there was no doubt of it. But again a loathing for all mental
exertion overmastered him; he would not think it out now, he would put it off
and think of something else. He remembered that during his epileptic fits, or
rather immediately preceding them, he had always experienced a moment or two
when his whole heart, and mind, and body seemed to wake up to vigour and light;
when he became filled with joy and hope, and all his anxieties seemed to be
swept away for ever; these moments were but presentiments, as it were, of the
one final second (it was never more than a second) in which the fit came upon
him. That second, of course, was inexpressible. When his attack was over, and
the prince reflected on his symptoms, he used to say to himself: “These
moments, short as they are, when I feel such extreme consciousness of myself,
and consequently more of life than at other times, are due only to the
disease—to the sudden rupture of normal conditions. Therefore they are
not really a higher kind of life, but a lower.” This reasoning, however,
seemed to end in a paradox, and lead to the further
consideration:—“What matter though it be only disease, an abnormal
tension of the brain, if when I recall and analyze the moment, it seems to have
been one of harmony and beauty in the highest degree—an instant of
deepest sensation, overflowing with unbounded joy and rapture, ecstatic
devotion, and completest life?” Vague though this sounds, it was
perfectly comprehensible to Muishkin, though he knew that it was but a feeble
expression of his sensations.
</p>

<p>
That there was, indeed, beauty and harmony in those abnormal moments, that they
really contained the highest synthesis of life, he could not doubt, nor even
admit the possibility of doubt. He felt that they were not analogous to the
fantastic and unreal dreams due to intoxication by hashish, opium or wine. Of
that he could judge, when the attack was over. These instants were
characterized—to define it in a word—by an intense quickening of
the sense of personality. Since, in the last conscious moment preceding the
attack, he could say to himself, with full understanding of his words: “I
would give my whole life for this one instant,” then doubtless to him it
really was worth a lifetime. For the rest, he thought the dialectical part of
his argument of little worth; he saw only too clearly that the result of these
ecstatic moments was stupefaction, mental darkness, idiocy. No argument was
possible on that point. His conclusion, his estimate of the
“moment,” doubtless contained some error, yet the reality of the
sensation troubled him. What’s more unanswerable than a fact? And this
fact had occurred. The prince had confessed unreservedly to himself that the
feeling of intense beatitude in that crowded moment made the moment worth a
lifetime. “I feel then,” he said one day to Rogojin in Moscow,
“I feel then as if I understood those amazing words—‘There
shall be no more time.’” And he added with a smile: “No doubt
the epileptic Mahomet refers to that same moment when he says that he visited
all the dwellings of Allah, in less time than was needed to empty his pitcher
of water.” Yes, he had often met Rogojin in Moscow, and many were the
subjects they discussed. “He told me I had been a brother to him,”
thought the prince. “He said so today, for the first time.”
</p>

<p>
He was sitting in the Summer Garden on a seat under a tree, and his mind dwelt
on the matter. It was about seven o’clock, and the place was empty. The
stifling atmosphere foretold a storm, and the prince felt a certain charm in
the contemplative mood which possessed him. He found pleasure, too, in gazing
at the exterior objects around him. All the time he was trying to forget some
thing, to escape from some idea that haunted him; but melancholy thoughts came
back, though he would so willingly have escaped from them. He remembered
suddenly how he had been talking to the waiter, while he dined, about a
recently committed murder which the whole town was discussing, and as he
thought of it something strange came over him. He was seized all at once by a
violent desire, almost a temptation, against which he strove in vain.
</p>

<p>
He jumped up and walked off as fast as he could towards the “Petersburg
Side.” [One of the quarters of St. Petersburg.] He had asked someone, a
little while before, to show him which was the Petersburg Side, on the banks of
the Neva. He had not gone there, however; and he knew very well that it was of
no use to go now, for he would certainly not find Lebedeff’s relation at
home. He had the address, but she must certainly have gone to Pavlofsk, or
Colia would have let him know. If he were to go now, it would merely be out of
curiosity, but a sudden, new idea had come into his head.
</p>

<p>
However, it was something to move on and know where he was going. A minute
later he was still moving on, but without knowing anything. He could no longer
think out his new idea. He tried to take an interest in all he saw; in the sky,
in the Neva. He spoke to some children he met. He felt his epileptic condition
becoming more and more developed. The evening was very close; thunder was heard
some way off.
</p>

<p>
The prince was haunted all that day by the face of Lebedeff’s nephew whom
he had seen for the first time that morning, just as one is haunted at times by
some persistent musical refrain. By a curious association of ideas, the young
man always appeared as the murderer of whom Lebedeff had spoken when
introducing him to Muishkin. Yes, he had read something about the murder, and
that quite recently. Since he came to Russia, he had heard many stories of this
kind, and was interested in them. His conversation with the waiter, an hour
ago, chanced to be on the subject of this murder of the Zemarins, and the
latter had agreed with him about it. He thought of the waiter again, and
decided that he was no fool, but a steady, intelligent man: though, said he to
himself, “God knows what he may really be; in a country with which one is
unfamiliar it is difficult to understand the people one meets.” He was
beginning to have a passionate faith in the Russian soul, however, and what
discoveries he had made in the last six months, what unexpected discoveries!
But every soul is a mystery, and depths of mystery lie in the soul of a
Russian. He had been intimate with Rogojin, for example, and a brotherly
friendship had sprung up between them—yet did he really know him? What
chaos and ugliness fills the world at times! What a self-satisfied rascal is
that nephew of Lebedeff’s! “But what am I thinking,”
continued the prince to himself. “Can he really have committed that
crime? Did he kill those six persons? I seem to be confusing things... how
strange it all is.... My head goes round... And Lebedeff’s
daughter—how sympathetic and charming her face was as she held the child
in her arms! What an innocent look and child-like laugh she had! It is curious
that I had forgotten her until now. I expect Lebedeff adores her—and I
really believe, when I think of it, that as sure as two and two make four, he
is fond of that nephew, too!”
</p>

<p>
Well, why should he judge them so hastily! Could he really say what they were,
after one short visit? Even Lebedeff seemed an enigma today. Did he expect to
find him so? He had never seen him like that before. Lebedeff and the Comtesse
du Barry! Good Heavens! If Rogojin should really kill someone, it would not, at
any rate, be such a senseless, chaotic affair. A knife made to a special
pattern, and six people killed in a kind of delirium. But Rogojin also had a
knife made to a special pattern. Can it be that Rogojin wishes to murder
anyone? The prince began to tremble violently. “It is a crime on my part
to imagine anything so base, with such cynical frankness.” His face
reddened with shame at the thought; and then there came across him as in a
flash the memory of the incidents at the Pavlofsk station, and at the other
station in the morning; and the question asked him by Rogojin about <i>the
eyes</i> and Rogojin’s cross, that he was even now wearing; and the
benediction of Rogojin’s mother; and his embrace on the darkened
staircase—that last supreme renunciation—and now, to find himself
full of this new “idea,” staring into shop-windows, and looking
round for things—how base he was!
</p>

<p>
Despair overmastered his soul; he would not go on, he would go back to his
hotel; he even turned and went the other way; but a moment after he changed his
mind again and went on in the old direction.
</p>

<p>
Why, here he was on the Petersburg Side already, quite close to the house!
Where was his “idea”? He was marching along without it now. Yes,
his malady was coming back, it was clear enough; all this gloom and heaviness,
all these “ideas,” were nothing more nor less than a fit coming on;
perhaps he would have a fit this very day.
</p>

<p>
But just now all the gloom and darkness had fled, his heart felt full of joy
and hope, there was no such thing as doubt. And yes, he hadn’t seen her
for so long; he really must see her. He wished he could meet Rogojin; he would
take his hand, and they would go to her together. His heart was pure, he was no
rival of Parfen’s. Tomorrow, he would go and tell him that he had seen
her. Why, he had only come for the sole purpose of seeing her, all the way from
Moscow! Perhaps she might be here still, who knows? She might not have gone
away to Pavlofsk yet.
</p>

<p>
Yes, all this must be put straight and above-board, there must be no more
passionate renouncements, such as Rogojin’s. It must all be clear as day.
Cannot Rogojin’s soul bear the light? He said he did not love her with
sympathy and pity; true, he added that “your pity is greater than my
love,” but he was not quite fair on himself there. Kin! Rogojin reading a
book—wasn’t that sympathy beginning? Did it not show that he
comprehended his relations with her? And his story of waiting day and night for
her forgiveness? That didn’t look quite like passion alone.
</p>

<p>
And as to her face, could it inspire nothing but passion? Could her face
inspire passion at all now? Oh, it inspired suffering, grief, overwhelming
grief of the soul! A poignant, agonizing memory swept over the prince’s
heart.
</p>

<p>
Yes, agonizing. He remembered how he had suffered that first day when he
thought he observed in her the symptoms of madness. He had almost fallen into
despair. How could he have lost his hold upon her when she ran away from him to
Rogojin? He ought to have run after her himself, rather than wait for news as
he had done. Can Rogojin have failed to observe, up to now, that she is mad?
Rogojin attributes her strangeness to other causes, to passion! What insane
jealousy! What was it he had hinted at in that suggestion of his? The prince
suddenly blushed, and shuddered to his very heart.
</p>

<p>
But why recall all this? There was insanity on both sides. For him, the prince,
to love this woman with passion, was unthinkable. It would be cruel and
inhuman. Yes. Rogojin is not fair to himself; he has a large heart; he has
aptitude for sympathy. When he learns the truth, and finds what a pitiable
being is this injured, broken, half-insane creature, he will forgive her all
the torment she has caused him. He will become her slave, her brother, her
friend. Compassion will teach even Rogojin, it will show him how to reason.
Compassion is the chief law of human existence. Oh, how guilty he felt towards
Rogojin! And, for a few warm, hasty words spoken in Moscow, Parfen had called
him “brother,” while he—but no, this was delirium! It would
all come right! That gloomy Parfen had implied that his faith was waning; he
must suffer dreadfully. He said he liked to look at that picture; it was not
that he liked it, but he felt the need of looking at it. Rogojin was not merely
a passionate soul; he was a fighter. He was fighting for the restoration of his
dying faith. He must have something to hold on to and believe, and someone to
believe in. What a strange picture that of Holbein’s is! Why, this is the
street, and here’s the house, No. 16.
</p>

<p>
The prince rang the bell, and asked for Nastasia Philipovna. The lady of the
house came out, and stated that Nastasia had gone to stay with Daria Alexeyevna
at Pavlofsk, and might be there some days.
</p>

<p>
Madame Filisoff was a little woman of forty, with a cunning face, and crafty,
piercing eyes. When, with an air of mystery, she asked her visitor’s
name, he refused at first to answer, but in a moment he changed his mind, and
left strict instructions that it should be given to Nastasia Philipovna. The
urgency of his request seemed to impress Madame Filisoff, and she put on a
knowing expression, as if to say, “You need not be afraid, I quite
understand.” The prince’s name evidently was a great surprise to
her. He stood and looked absently at her for a moment, then turned, and took
the road back to his hotel. But he went away not as he came. A great change had
suddenly come over him. He went blindly forward; his knees shook under him; he
was tormented by “ideas”; his lips were blue, and trembled with a
feeble, meaningless smile. His demon was upon him once more.
</p>

<p>
What had happened to him? Why was his brow clammy with drops of moisture, his
knees shaking beneath him, and his soul oppressed with a cold gloom? Was it
because he had just seen these dreadful eyes again? Why, he had left the Summer
Garden on purpose to see them; that had been his “idea.” He had
wished to assure himself that he would see them once more at that house. Then
why was he so overwhelmed now, having seen them as he expected? just as though
he had not expected to see them! Yes, they were the very same eyes; and no
doubt about it. The same that he had seen in the crowd that morning at the
station, the same that he had surprised in Rogojin’s rooms some hours
later, when the latter had replied to his inquiry with a sneering laugh,
“Well, whose eyes were they?” Then for the third time they had
appeared just as he was getting into the train on his way to see Aglaya. He had
had a strong impulse to rush up to Rogojin, and repeat his words of the morning
“Whose eyes are they?” Instead he had fled from the station, and
knew nothing more, until he found himself gazing into the window of a
cutler’s shop, and wondering if a knife with a staghorn handle would cost
more than sixty copecks. And as the prince sat dreaming in the Summer Garden
under a lime-tree, a wicked demon had come and whispered in his car:
“Rogojin has been spying upon you and watching you all the morning in a
frenzy of desperation. When he finds you have not gone to Pavlofsk—a
terrible discovery for him—he will surely go at once to that house in
Petersburg Side, and watch for you there, although only this morning you gave
your word of honour not to see <i>her</i>, and swore that you had not come to
Petersburg for that purpose.” And thereupon the prince had hastened off
to that house, and what was there in the fact that he had met Rogojin there? He
had only seen a wretched, suffering creature, whose state of mind was gloomy
and miserable, but most comprehensible. In the morning Rogojin had seemed to be
trying to keep out of the way; but at the station this afternoon he had stood
out, he had concealed himself, indeed, less than the prince himself; at the
house, now, he had stood fifty yards off on the other side of the road, with
folded hands, watching, plainly in view and apparently desirous of being seen.
He had stood there like an accuser, like a judge, not like a—a what?
</p>

<p>
And why had not the prince approached him and spoken to him, instead of turning
away and pretending he had seen nothing, although their eyes met? (Yes, their
eyes had met, and they had looked at each other.) Why, he had himself wished to
take Rogojin by the hand and go in together, he had himself determined to go to
him on the morrow and tell him that he had seen her, he had repudiated the
demon as he walked to the house, and his heart had been full of joy.
</p>

<p>
Was there something in the whole aspect of the man, today, sufficient to
justify the prince’s terror, and the awful suspicions of his demon?
Something seen, but indescribable, which filled him with dreadful
presentiments? Yes, he was convinced of it—convinced of what? (Oh, how
mean and hideous of him to feel this conviction, this presentiment! How he
blamed himself for it!) “Speak if you dare, and tell me, what is the
presentiment?” he repeated to himself, over and over again. “Put it
into words, speak out clearly and distinctly. Oh, miserable coward that I
am!” The prince flushed with shame for his own baseness. “How shall
I ever look this man in the face again? My God, what a day! And what a
nightmare, what a nightmare!”
</p>

<p>
There was a moment, during this long, wretched walk back from the Petersburg
Side, when the prince felt an irresistible desire to go straight to
Rogojin’s, wait for him, embrace him with tears of shame and contrition,
and tell him of his distrust, and finish with it—once for all.
</p>

<p>
But here he was back at his hotel.
</p>

<p>
How often during the day he had thought of this hotel with loathing—its
corridor, its rooms, its stairs. How he had dreaded coming back to it, for some
reason.
</p>

<p>
“What a regular old woman I am today,” he had said to himself each
time, with annoyance. “I believe in every foolish presentiment that comes
into my head.”
</p>

<p>
He stopped for a moment at the door; a great flush of shame came over him.
“I am a coward, a wretched coward,” he said, and moved forward
again; but once more he paused.
</p>

<p>
Among all the incidents of the day, one recurred to his mind to the exclusion
of the rest; although now that his self-control was regained, and he was no
longer under the influence of a nightmare, he was able to think of it calmly.
It concerned the knife on Rogojin’s table. “Why should not Rogojin
have as many knives on his table as he chooses?” thought the prince,
wondering at his suspicions, as he had done when he found himself looking into
the cutler’s window. “What could it have to do with me?” he
said to himself again, and stopped as if rooted to the ground by a kind of
paralysis of limb such as attacks people under the stress of some humiliating
recollection.
</p>

<p>
The doorway was dark and gloomy at any time; but just at this moment it was
rendered doubly so by the fact that the thunder-storm had just broken, and the
rain was coming down in torrents.
</p>

<p>
And in the semi-darkness the prince distinguished a man standing close to the
stairs, apparently waiting.
</p>

<p>
There was nothing particularly significant in the fact that a man was standing
back in the doorway, waiting to come out or go upstairs; but the prince felt an
irresistible conviction that he knew this man, and that it was Rogojin. The man
moved on up the stairs; a moment later the prince passed up them, too. His
heart froze within him. “In a minute or two I shall know all,” he
thought.
</p>

<p>
The staircase led to the first and second corridors of the hotel, along which
lay the guests’ bedrooms. As is often the case in Petersburg houses, it
was narrow and very dark, and turned around a massive stone column.
</p>

<p>
On the first landing, which was as small as the necessary turn of the stairs
allowed, there was a niche in the column, about half a yard wide, and in this
niche the prince felt convinced that a man stood concealed. He thought he could
distinguish a figure standing there. He would pass by quickly and not look. He
took a step forward, but could bear the uncertainty no longer and turned his
head.
</p>

<p>
The eyes—the same two eyes—met his! The man concealed in the niche
had also taken a step forward. For one second they stood face to face.
</p>

<p>
Suddenly the prince caught the man by the shoulder and twisted him round
towards the light, so that he might see his face more clearly.
</p>

<p>
Rogojin’s eyes flashed, and a smile of insanity distorted his
countenance. His right hand was raised, and something glittered in it. The
prince did not think of trying to stop it. All he could remember afterwards was
that he seemed to have called out:
</p>

<p>
“Parfen! I won’t believe it.”
</p>

<p>
Next moment something appeared to burst open before him: a wonderful inner
light illuminated his soul. This lasted perhaps half a second, yet he
distinctly remembered hearing the beginning of the wail, the strange, dreadful
wail, which burst from his lips of its own accord, and which no effort of will
on his part could suppress.
</p>

<p>
Next moment he was absolutely unconscious; black darkness blotted out
everything.
</p>

<p>
He had fallen in an epileptic fit.
</p> <hr /> <p>
As is well known, these fits occur instantaneously. The face, especially the
eyes, become terribly disfigured, convulsions seize the limbs, a terrible cry
breaks from the sufferer, a wail from which everything human seems to be
blotted out, so that it is impossible to believe that the man who has just
fallen is the same who emitted the dreadful cry. It seems more as though some
other being, inside the stricken one, had cried. Many people have borne witness
to this impression; and many cannot behold an epileptic fit without a feeling
of mysterious terror and dread.
</p>

<p>
Such a feeling, we must suppose, overtook Rogojin at this moment, and saved the
prince’s life. Not knowing that it was a fit, and seeing his victim
disappear head foremost into the darkness, hearing his head strike the stone
steps below with a crash, Rogojin rushed downstairs, skirting the body, and
flung himself headlong out of the hotel, like a raving madman.
</p>

<p>
The prince’s body slipped convulsively down the steps till it rested at
the bottom. Very soon, in five minutes or so, he was discovered, and a crowd
collected around him.
</p>

<p>
A pool of blood on the steps near his head gave rise to grave fears. Was it a
case of accident, or had there been a crime? It was, however, soon recognized
as a case of epilepsy, and identification and proper measures for restoration
followed one another, owing to a fortunate circumstance. Colia Ivolgin had come
back to his hotel about seven o’clock, owing to a sudden impulse which
made him refuse to dine at the Epanchins’, and, finding a note from the
prince awaiting him, had sped away to the latter’s address. Arrived
there, he ordered a cup of tea and sat sipping it in the coffee-room. While
there he heard excited whispers of someone just found at the bottom of the
stairs in a fit; upon which he had hurried to the spot, with a presentiment of
evil, and at once recognized the prince.
</p>

<p>
The sufferer was immediately taken to his room, and though he partially
regained consciousness, he lay long in a semi-dazed condition.
</p>

<p>
The doctor stated that there was no danger to be apprehended from the wound on
the head, and as soon as the prince could understand what was going on around
him, Colia hired a carriage and took him away to Lebedeff’s. There he was
received with much cordiality, and the departure to the country was hastened on
his account. Three days later they were all at Pavlofsk.
</p>

<h3>VI.</h3>

<p>
Lebedeff’s country-house was not large, but it was pretty and convenient,
especially the part which was let to the prince.
</p>

<p>
A row of orange and lemon trees and jasmines, planted in green tubs, stood on
the fairly wide terrace. According to Lebedeff, these trees gave the house a
most delightful aspect. Some were there when he bought it, and he was so
charmed with the effect that he promptly added to their number. When the tubs
containing these plants arrived at the villa and were set in their places,
Lebedeff kept running into the street to enjoy the view of the house, and every
time he did so the rent to be demanded from the future tenant went up with a
bound.
</p>

<p>
This country villa pleased the prince very much in his state of physical and
mental exhaustion. On the day that they left for Pavlofsk, that is the day
after his attack, he appeared almost well, though in reality he felt very far
from it. The faces of those around him for the last three days had made a
pleasant impression. He was pleased to see, not only Colia, who had become his
inseparable companion, but Lebedeff himself and all the family, except the
nephew, who had left the house. He was also glad to receive a visit from
General Ivolgin, before leaving St. Petersburg.
</p>

<p>
It was getting late when the party arrived at Pavlofsk, but several people
called to see the prince, and assembled in the verandah. Gania was the first to
arrive. He had grown so pale and thin that the prince could hardly recognize
him. Then came Varia and Ptitsin, who were rusticating in the neighbourhood. As
to General Ivolgin, he scarcely budged from Lebedeff’s house, and seemed
to have moved to Pavlofsk with him. Lebedeff did his best to keep Ardalion
Alexandrovitch by him, and to prevent him from invading the prince’s
quarters. He chatted with him confidentially, so that they might have been
taken for old friends. During those three days the prince had noticed that they
frequently held long conversations; he often heard their voices raised in
argument on deep and learned subjects, which evidently pleased Lebedeff. He
seemed as if he could not do without the general. But it was not only Ardalion
Alexandrovitch whom Lebedeff kept out of the prince’s way. Since they had
come to the villa, he treated his own family the same. Upon the pretext that
his tenant needed quiet, he kept him almost in isolation, and Muishkin
protested in vain against this excess of zeal. Lebedeff stamped his feet at his
daughters and drove them away if they attempted to join the prince on the
terrace; not even Vera was excepted.
</p>

<p>
“They will lose all respect if they are allowed to be so free and easy;
besides it is not proper for them,” he declared at last, in answer to a
direct question from the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Why on earth not?” asked the latter. “Really, you know, you
are making yourself a nuisance, by keeping guard over me like this. I get bored
all by myself; I have told you so over and over again, and you get on my nerves
more than ever by waving your hands and creeping in and out in the mysterious
way you do.”
</p>

<p>
It was a fact that Lebedeff, though he was so anxious to keep everyone else
from disturbing the patient, was continually in and out of the prince’s
room himself. He invariably began by opening the door a crack and peering in to
see if the prince was there, or if he had escaped; then he would creep softly
up to the arm-chair, sometimes making Muishkin jump by his sudden appearance.
He always asked if the patient wanted anything, and when the latter replied
that he only wanted to be left in peace, he would turn away obediently and make
for the door on tip-toe, with deprecatory gestures to imply that he had only
just looked in, that he would not speak a word, and would go away and not
intrude again; which did not prevent him from reappearing in ten minutes or a
quarter of an hour. Colia had free access to the prince, at which Lebedeff was
quite disgusted and indignant. He would listen at the door for half an hour at
a time while the two were talking. Colia found this out, and naturally told the
prince of his discovery.
</p>

<p>
“Do you think yourself my master, that you try to keep me under lock and
key like this?” said the prince to Lebedeff. “In the country, at
least, I intend to be free, and you may make up your mind that I mean to see
whom I like, and go where I please.”
</p>

<p>
“Why, of course,” replied the clerk, gesticulating with his hands.
</p>

<p>
The prince looked him sternly up and down.
</p>

<p>
“Well, Lukian Timofeyovitch, have you brought the little cupboard that
you had at the head of your bed with you here?”
</p>

<p>
“No, I left it where it was.”
</p>

<p>
“Impossible!”
</p>

<p>
“It cannot be moved; you would have to pull the wall down, it is so
firmly fixed.”
</p>

<p>
“Perhaps you have one like it here?”
</p>

<p>
“I have one that is even better, much better; that is really why I bought
this house.”
</p>

<p>
“Ah! What visitor did you turn away from my door, about an hour
ago?”
</p>

<p>
“The-the general. I would not let him in; there is no need for him to
visit you, prince... I have the deepest esteem for him, he is a—a great
man. You don’t believe it? Well, you will see, and yet, most excellent
prince, you had much better not receive him.”
</p>

<p>
“May I ask why? and also why you walk about on tiptoe and always seem as
if you were going to whisper a secret in my ear whenever you come near
me?”
</p>

<p>
“I am vile, vile; I know it!” cried Lebedeff, beating his breast
with a contrite air. “But will not the general be too hospitable for
you?”
</p>

<p>
“Too hospitable?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes. First, he proposes to come and live in my house. Well and good; but
he sticks at nothing; he immediately makes himself one of the family. We have
talked over our respective relations several times, and discovered that we are
connected by marriage. It seems also that you are a sort of nephew on his
mother’s side; he was explaining it to me again only yesterday. If you
are his nephew, it follows that I must also be a relation of yours, most
excellent prince. Never mind about that, it is only a foible; but just now he
assured me that all his life, from the day he was made an ensign to the 11th of
last June, he has entertained at least two hundred guests at his table every
day. Finally, he went so far as to say that they never rose from the table;
they dined, supped, and had tea, for fifteen hours at a stretch. This went on
for thirty years without a break; there was barely time to change the
table-cloth; directly one person left, another took his place. On feast-days he
entertained as many as three hundred guests, and they numbered seven hundred on
the thousandth anniversary of the foundation of the Russian Empire. It amounts
to a passion with him; it makes one uneasy to hear of it. It is terrible to
have to entertain people who do things on such a scale. That is why I wonder
whether such a man is not too hospitable for you and me.”
</p>

<p>
“But you seem to be on the best of terms with him?”
</p>

<p>
“Quite fraternal—I look upon it as a joke. Let us be
brothers-in-law, it is all the same to me,—rather an honour than not. But
in spite of the two hundred guests and the thousandth anniversary of the
Russian Empire, I can see that he is a very remarkable man. I am quite sincere.
You said just now that I always looked as if I was going to tell you a secret;
you are right. I have a secret to tell you: a certain person has just let me
know that she is very anxious for a secret interview with you.”
</p>

<p>
“Why should it be secret? Not at all; I will call on her myself
tomorrow.”
</p>

<p>
“No, oh no!” cried Lebedeff, waving his arms; “if she is
afraid, it is not for the reason you think. By the way, do you know that the
monster comes every day to inquire after your health?”
</p>

<p>
“You call him a monster so often that it makes me suspicious.”
</p>

<p>
“You must have no suspicions, none whatever,” said Lebedeff
quickly. “I only want you to know that the person in question is not
afraid of him, but of something quite, quite different.”
</p>

<p>
“What on earth is she afraid of, then? Tell me plainly, without any more
beating about the bush,” said the prince, exasperated by the
other’s mysterious grimaces.
</p>

<p>
“Ah that is the secret,” said Lebedeff, with a smile.
</p>

<p>
“Whose secret?”
</p>

<p>
“Yours. You forbade me yourself to mention it before you, most excellent
prince,” murmured Lebedeff. Then, satisfied that he had worked up
Muishkin’s curiosity to the highest pitch, he added abruptly: “She
is afraid of Aglaya Ivanovna.”
</p>

<p>
The prince frowned for a moment in silence, and then said suddenly:
</p>

<p>
“Really, Lebedeff, I must leave your house. Where are Gavrila
Ardalionovitch and the Ptitsins? Are they here? Have you chased them away,
too?”
</p>

<p>
“They are coming, they are coming; and the general as well. I will open
all the doors; I will call all my daughters, all of them, this very
minute,” said Lebedeff in a low voice, thoroughly frightened, and waving
his hands as he ran from door to door.
</p>

<p>
At that moment Colia appeared on the terrace; he announced that Lizabetha
Prokofievna and her three daughters were close behind him.
</p>

<p>
Moved by this news, Lebedeff hurried up to the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Shall I call the Ptitsins, and Gavrila Ardalionovitch? Shall I let the
general in?” he asked.
</p>

<p>
“Why not? Let in anyone who wants to see me. I assure you, Lebedeff, you
have misunderstood my position from the very first; you have been wrong all
along. I have not the slightest reason to hide myself from anyone,”
replied the prince gaily.
</p>

<p>
Seeing him laugh, Lebedeff thought fit to laugh also, and though much agitated
his satisfaction was quite visible.
</p>

<p>
Colia was right; the Epanchin ladies were only a few steps behind him. As they
approached the terrace other visitors appeared from Lebedeff’s side of
the house—the Ptitsins, Gania, and Ardalion Alexandrovitch.
</p>

<p>
The Epanchins had only just heard of the prince’s illness and of his
presence in Pavlofsk, from Colia; and up to this time had been in a state of
considerable bewilderment about him. The general brought the prince’s
card down from town, and Mrs. Epanchin had felt convinced that he himself would
follow his card at once; she was much excited.
</p>

<p>
In vain the girls assured her that a man who had not written for six months
would not be in such a dreadful hurry, and that probably he had enough to do in
town without needing to bustle down to Pavlofsk to see them. Their mother was
quite angry at the very idea of such a thing, and announced her absolute
conviction that he would turn up the next day at latest.
</p>

<p>
So next day the prince was expected all the morning, and at dinner, tea, and
supper; and when he did not appear in the evening, Mrs. Epanchin quarrelled
with everyone in the house, finding plenty of pretexts without so much as
mentioning the prince’s name.
</p>

<p>
On the third day there was no talk of him at all, until Aglaya remarked at
dinner: “Mamma is cross because the prince hasn’t turned up,”
to which the general replied that it was not his fault.
</p>

<p>
Mrs. Epanchin misunderstood the observation, and rising from her place she left
the room in majestic wrath. In the evening, however, Colia came with the story
of the prince’s adventures, so far as he knew them. Mrs. Epanchin was
triumphant; although Colia had to listen to a long lecture. “He idles
about here the whole day long, one can’t get rid of him; and then when he
is wanted he does not come. He might have sent a line if he did not wish to
inconvenience himself.”
</p>

<p>
At the words “one can’t get rid of him,” Colia was very
angry, and nearly flew into a rage; but he resolved to be quiet for the time
and show his resentment later. If the words had been less offensive he might
have forgiven them, so pleased was he to see Lizabetha Prokofievna worried and
anxious about the prince’s illness.
</p>

<p>
She would have insisted on sending to Petersburg at once, for a certain great
medical celebrity; but her daughters dissuaded her, though they were not
willing to stay behind when she at once prepared to go and visit the invalid.
Aglaya, however, suggested that it was a little unceremonious to go <i>en
masse</i> to see him.
</p>

<p>
“Very well then, stay at home,” said Mrs. Epanchin, “and a
good thing too, for Evgenie Pavlovitch is coming down and there will be no one
at home to receive him.”
</p>

<p>
Of course, after this, Aglaya went with the rest. In fact, she had never had
the slightest intention of doing otherwise.
</p>

<p>
Prince S., who was in the house, was requested to escort the ladies. He had
been much interested when he first heard of the prince from the Epanchins. It
appeared that they had known one another before, and had spent some time
together in a little provincial town three months ago. Prince S. had greatly
taken to him, and was delighted with the opportunity of meeting him again.
</p>

<p>
The general had not come down from town as yet, nor had Evgenie Pavlovitch
arrived.
</p>

<p>
It was not more than two or three hundred yards from the Epanchins’ house
to Lebedeff’s. The first disagreeable impression experienced by Mrs.
Epanchin was to find the prince surrounded by a whole assembly of other
guests—not to mention the fact that some of those present were
particularly detestable in her eyes. The next annoying circumstance was when an
apparently strong and healthy young fellow, well dressed, and smiling, came
forward to meet her on the terrace, instead of the half-dying unfortunate whom
she had expected to see.
</p>

<p>
She was astonished and vexed, and her disappointment pleased Colia immensely.
Of course he could have undeceived her before she started, but the mischievous
boy had been careful not to do that, foreseeing the probably laughable disgust
that she would experience when she found her dear friend, the prince, in good
health. Colia was indelicate enough to voice the delight he felt at his success
in managing to annoy Lizabetha Prokofievna, with whom, in spite of their really
amicable relations, he was constantly sparring.
</p>

<p>
“Just wait a while, my boy!” said she; “don’t be too
certain of your triumph.” And she sat down heavily, in the arm-chair
pushed forward by the prince.
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff, Ptitsin, and General Ivolgin hastened to find chairs for the young
ladies. Varia greeted them joyfully, and they exchanged confidences in ecstatic
whispers.
</p>

<p>
“I must admit, prince, I was a little put out to see you up and about
like this—I expected to find you in bed; but I give you my word, I was
only annoyed for an instant, before I collected my thoughts properly. I am
always wiser on second thoughts, and I dare say you are the same. I assure you
I am as glad to see you well as though you were my own son,—yes, and
more; and if you don’t believe me the more shame to you, and it’s
not my fault. But that spiteful boy delights in playing all sorts of tricks.
You are his patron, it seems. Well, I warn you that one fine morning I shall
deprive myself of the pleasure of his further acquaintance.”
</p>

<p>
“What have I done wrong now?” cried Colia. “What was the good
of telling you that the prince was nearly well again? You would not have
believed me; it was so much more interesting to picture him on his
death-bed.”
</p>

<p>
“How long do you remain here, prince?” asked Madame Epanchin.
</p>

<p>
“All the summer, and perhaps longer.”
</p>

<p>
“You are alone, aren’t you,—not married?”
</p>

<p>
“No, I’m not married!” replied the prince, smiling at the
ingenuousness of this little feeler.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, you needn’t laugh! These things do happen, you know! Now
then—why didn’t you come to us? We have a wing quite empty. But
just as you like, of course. Do you lease it from <i>him?</i>—this
fellow, I mean,” she added, nodding towards Lebedeff. “And why does
he always wriggle so?”
</p>

<p>
At that moment Vera, carrying the baby in her arms as usual, came out of the
house, on to the terrace. Lebedeff kept fidgeting among the chairs, and did not
seem to know what to do with himself, though he had no intention of going away.
He no sooner caught sight of his daughter, than he rushed in her direction,
waving his arms to keep her away; he even forgot himself so far as to stamp his
foot.
</p>

<p>
“Is he mad?” asked Madame Epanchin suddenly.
</p>

<p>
“No, he...”
</p>

<p>
“Perhaps he is drunk? Your company is rather peculiar,” she added,
with a glance at the other guests....
</p>

<p>
“But what a pretty girl! Who is she?”
</p>

<p>
“That is Lebedeff’s daughter—Vera Lukianovna.”
</p>

<p>
“Indeed? She looks very sweet. I should like to make her
acquaintance.”
</p>

<p>
The words were hardly out of her mouth, when Lebedeff dragged Vera forward, in
order to present her.
</p>

<p>
“Orphans, poor orphans!” he began in a pathetic voice.
</p>

<p>
“The child she carries is an orphan, too. She is Vera’s sister, my
daughter Luboff. The day this babe was born, six weeks ago, my wife died, by
the will of God Almighty.... Yes... Vera takes her mother’s place, though
she is but her sister... nothing more... nothing more...”
</p>

<p>
“And you! You are nothing more than a fool, if you’ll excuse me!
Well! well! you know that yourself, I expect,” said the lady indignantly.
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff bowed low. “It is the truth,” he replied, with extreme
respect.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, Mr. Lebedeff, I am told you lecture on the Apocalypse. Is it
true?” asked Aglaya.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, that is so... for the last fifteen years.”
</p>

<p>
“I have heard of you, and I think read of you in the newspapers.”
</p>

<p>
“No, that was another commentator, whom the papers named. He is dead,
however, and I have taken his place,” said the other, much delighted.
</p>

<p>
“We are neighbours, so will you be so kind as to come over one day and
explain the Apocalypse to me?” said Aglaya. “I do not understand it
in the least.”
</p>

<p>
“Allow me to warn you,” interposed General Ivolgin, “that he
is the greatest charlatan on earth.” He had taken the chair next to the
girl, and was impatient to begin talking. “No doubt there are pleasures
and amusements peculiar to the country,” he continued, “and to
listen to a pretended student holding forth on the book of the Revelations may
be as good as any other. It may even be original. But... you seem to be looking
at me with some surprise—may I introduce myself—General
Ivolgin—I carried you in my arms as a baby—”
</p>

<p>
“Delighted, I’m sure,” said Aglaya; “I am acquainted
with Varvara Ardalionovna and Nina Alexandrovna.” She was trying hard to
restrain herself from laughing.
</p>

<p>
Mrs. Epanchin flushed up; some accumulation of spleen in her suddenly needed an
outlet. She could not bear this General Ivolgin whom she had once known, long
ago—in society.
</p>

<p>
“You are deviating from the truth, sir, as usual!” she remarked,
boiling over with indignation; “you never carried her in your
life!”
</p>

<p>
“You have forgotten, mother,” said Aglaya, suddenly. “He
really did carry me about,—in Tver, you know. I was six years old, I
remember. He made me a bow and arrow, and I shot a pigeon. Don’t you
remember shooting a pigeon, you and I, one day?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, and he made me a cardboard helmet, and a little wooden
sword—I remember!” said Adelaida.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I remember too!” said Alexandra. “You quarrelled about
the wounded pigeon, and Adelaida was put in the corner, and stood there with
her helmet and sword and all.”
</p>

<p>
The poor general had merely made the remark about having carried Aglaya in his
arms because he always did so begin a conversation with young people. But it
happened that this time he had really hit upon the truth, though he had himself
entirely forgotten the fact. But when Adelaida and Aglaya recalled the episode
of the pigeon, his mind became filled with memories, and it is impossible to
describe how this poor old man, usually half drunk, was moved by the
recollection.
</p>

<p>
“I remember—I remember it all!” he cried. “I was
captain then. You were such a lovely little thing—Nina
Alexandrovna!—Gania, listen! I was received then by General
Epanchin.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, and look what you have come to now!” interrupted Mrs.
Epanchin. “However, I see you have not quite drunk your better feelings
away. But you’ve broken your wife’s heart, sir—and instead of
looking after your children, you have spent your time in public-houses and
debtors’ prisons! Go away, my friend, stand in some corner and weep, and
bemoan your fallen dignity, and perhaps God will forgive you yet! Go, go!
I’m serious! There’s nothing so favourable for repentance as to
think of the past with feelings of remorse!”
</p>

<p>
There was no need to repeat that she was serious. The general, like all
drunkards, was extremely emotional and easily touched by recollections of his
better days. He rose and walked quietly to the door, so meekly that Mrs.
Epanchin was instantly sorry for him.
</p>

<p>
“Ardalion Alexandrovitch,” she cried after him, “wait a
moment, we are all sinners! When you feel that your conscience reproaches you a
little less, come over to me and we’ll have a talk about the past! I dare
say I am fifty times more of a sinner than you are! And now go, go, good-bye,
you had better not stay here!” she added, in alarm, as he turned as
though to come back.
</p>

<p>
“Don’t go after him just now, Colia, or he’ll be vexed, and
the benefit of this moment will be lost!” said the prince, as the boy was
hurrying out of the room.
</p>

<p>
“Quite true! Much better to go in half an hour or so,” said Mrs.
Epanchin.
</p>

<p>
“That’s what comes of telling the truth for once in one’s
life!” said Lebedeff. “It reduced him to tears.”
</p>

<p>
“Come, come! the less <i>you</i> say about it the better—to judge
from all I have heard about you!” replied Mrs. Epanchin.
</p>

<p>
The prince took the first opportunity of informing the Epanchin ladies that he
had intended to pay them a visit that day, if they had not themselves come this
afternoon, and Lizabetha Prokofievna replied that she hoped he would still do
so.
</p>

<p>
By this time some of the visitors had disappeared.
</p>

<p>
Ptitsin had tactfully retreated to Lebedeff’s wing; and Gania soon
followed him.
</p>

<p>
The latter had behaved modestly, but with dignity, on this occasion of his
first meeting with the Epanchins since the rupture. Twice Mrs. Epanchin had
deliberately examined him from head to foot; but he had stood fire without
flinching. He was certainly much changed, as anyone could see who had not met
him for some time; and this fact seemed to afford Aglaya a good deal of
satisfaction.
</p>

<p>
“That was Gavrila Ardalionovitch, who just went out, wasn’t
it?” she asked suddenly, interrupting somebody else’s conversation
to make the remark.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, it was,” said the prince.
</p>

<p>
“I hardly knew him; he is much changed, and for the better!”
</p>

<p>
“I am very glad,” said the prince.
</p>

<p>
“He has been very ill,” added Varia.
</p>

<p>
“How has he changed for the better?” asked Mrs. Epanchin. “I
don’t see any change for the better! What’s better in him? Where
did you get <i>that</i> idea from? <i>what</i>’s better?”
</p>

<p>
“There’s nothing better than the ‘poor knight’!”
said Colia, who was standing near the last speaker’s chair.
</p>

<p>
“I quite agree with you there!” said Prince S., laughing.
</p>

<p>
“So do I,” said Adelaida, solemnly.
</p>

<p>
“<i>What</i> poor knight?” asked Mrs. Epanchin, looking round at
the face of each of the speakers in turn. Seeing, however, that Aglaya was
blushing, she added, angrily:
</p>

<p>
“What nonsense you are all talking! What do you mean by poor
knight?”
</p>

<p>
“It’s not the first time this urchin, your favourite, has shown his
impudence by twisting other people’s words,” said Aglaya,
haughtily.
</p>

<p>
Every time that Aglaya showed temper (and this was very often), there was so
much childish pouting, such “school-girlishness,” as it were, in
her apparent wrath, that it was impossible to avoid smiling at her, to her own
unutterable indignation. On these occasions she would say, “How can they,
how <i>dare</i> they laugh at me?”
</p>

<p>
This time everyone laughed at her, her sisters, Prince S., Prince Muishkin
(though he himself had flushed for some reason), and Colia. Aglaya was
dreadfully indignant, and looked twice as pretty in her wrath.
</p>

<p>
“He’s always twisting round what one says,” she cried.
</p>

<p>
“I am only repeating your own exclamation!” said Colia. “A
month ago you were turning over the pages of your Don Quixote, and suddenly
called out ‘there is nothing better than the poor knight.’ I
don’t know whom you were referring to, of course, whether to Don Quixote,
or Evgenie Pavlovitch, or someone else, but you certainly said these words, and
afterwards there was a long conversation...”
</p>

<p>
“You are inclined to go a little too far, my good boy, with your
guesses,” said Mrs. Epanchin, with some show of annoyance.
</p>

<p>
“But it’s not I alone,” cried Colia. “They all talked
about it, and they do still. Why, just now Prince S. and Adelaida Ivanovna
declared that they upheld ‘the poor knight’; so evidently there
does exist a ‘poor knight’; and if it were not for Adelaida
Ivanovna, we should have known long ago who the ‘poor knight’
was.”
</p>

<p>
“Why, how am I to blame?” asked Adelaida, smiling.
</p>

<p>
“You wouldn’t draw his portrait for us, that’s why you are to
blame! Aglaya Ivanovna asked you to draw his portrait, and gave you the whole
subject of the picture. She invented it herself; and you wouldn’t.”
</p>

<p>
“What was I to draw? According to the lines she quoted:
</p>

<p class="poem">
“‘From his face he never lifted<br />
That eternal mask of steel.’”
</p>

<p>
“What sort of a face was I to draw? I couldn’t draw a mask.”
</p>

<p>
“I don’t know what you are driving at; what mask do you
mean?” said Mrs. Epanchin, irritably. She began to see pretty clearly
though what it meant, and whom they referred to by the generally accepted title
of “poor knight.” But what specially annoyed her was that the
prince was looking so uncomfortable, and blushing like a ten-year-old child.
</p>

<p>
“Well, have you finished your silly joke?” she added, “and am
I to be told what this ‘poor knight’ means, or is it a solemn
secret which cannot be approached lightly?”
</p>

<p>
But they all laughed on.
</p>

<p>
“It’s simply that there is a Russian poem,” began Prince S.,
evidently anxious to change the conversation, “a strange thing, without
beginning or end, and all about a ‘poor knight.’ A month or so ago,
we were all talking and laughing, and looking up a subject for one of
Adelaida’s pictures—you know it is the principal business of this
family to find subjects for Adelaida’s pictures. Well, we happened upon
this ‘poor knight.’ I don’t remember who thought of it
first—”
</p>

<p>
“Oh! Aglaya Ivanovna did,” said Colia.
</p>

<p>
“Very likely—I don’t recollect,” continued Prince S.
</p>

<p>
“Some of us laughed at the subject; some liked it; but she declared that,
in order to make a picture of the gentleman, she must first see his face. We
then began to think over all our friends’ faces to see if any of them
would do, and none suited us, and so the matter stood; that’s all. I
don’t know why Nicolai Ardalionovitch has brought up the joke now. What
was appropriate and funny then, has quite lost all interest by this
time.”
</p>

<p>
“Probably there’s some new silliness about it,” said Mrs.
Epanchin, sarcastically.
</p>

<p>
“There is no silliness about it at all—only the profoundest
respect,” said Aglaya, very seriously. She had quite recovered her
temper; in fact, from certain signs, it was fair to conclude that she was
delighted to see this joke going so far; and a careful observer might have
remarked that her satisfaction dated from the moment when the fact of the
prince’s confusion became apparent to all.
</p>

<p>
“‘Profoundest respect!’ What nonsense! First, insane
giggling, and then, all of a sudden, a display of ‘profoundest
respect.’ Why respect? Tell me at once, why have you suddenly developed
this ‘profound respect,’ eh?”
</p>

<p>
“Because,” replied Aglaya gravely, “in the poem the knight is
described as a man capable of living up to an ideal all his life. That sort of
thing is not to be found every day among the men of our times. In the poem it
is not stated exactly what the ideal was, but it was evidently some vision,
some revelation of pure Beauty, and the knight wore round his neck, instead of
a scarf, a rosary. A device—A. N. B.—the meaning of which is not
explained, was inscribed on his shield—”
</p>

<p>
“No, A. N. D.,” corrected Colia.
</p>

<p>
“I say A. N. B., and so it shall be!” cried Aglaya, irritably.
“Anyway, the ‘poor knight’ did not care what his lady was, or
what she did. He had chosen his ideal, and he was bound to serve her, and break
lances for her, and acknowledge her as the ideal of pure Beauty, whatever she
might say or do afterwards. If she had taken to stealing, he would have
championed her just the same. I think the poet desired to embody in this one
picture the whole spirit of medieval chivalry and the platonic love of a pure
and high-souled knight. Of course it’s all an ideal, and in the
‘poor knight’ that spirit reached the utmost limit of asceticism.
He is a Don Quixote, only serious and not comical. I used not to understand
him, and laughed at him, but now I love the ‘poor knight,’ and
respect his actions.”
</p>

<p>
So ended Aglaya; and, to look at her, it was difficult, indeed, to judge
whether she was joking or in earnest.
</p>

<p>
“Pooh! he was a fool, and his actions were the actions of a fool,”
said Mrs. Epanchin; “and as for you, young woman, you ought to know
better. At all events, you are not to talk like that again. What poem is it?
Recite it! I want to hear this poem! I have hated poetry all my life. Prince,
you must excuse this nonsense. We neither of us like this sort of thing! Be
patient!”
</p>

<p>
They certainly were put out, both of them.
</p>

<p>
The prince tried to say something, but he was too confused, and could not get
his words out. Aglaya, who had taken such liberties in her little speech, was
the only person present, perhaps, who was not in the least embarrassed. She
seemed, in fact, quite pleased.
</p>

<p>
She now rose solemnly from her seat, walked to the centre of the terrace, and
stood in front of the prince’s chair. All looked on with some surprise,
and Prince S. and her sisters with feelings of decided alarm, to see what new
frolic she was up to; it had gone quite far enough already, they thought. But
Aglaya evidently thoroughly enjoyed the affectation and ceremony with which she
was introducing her recitation of the poem.
</p>

<p>
Mrs. Epanchin was just wondering whether she would not forbid the performance
after all, when, at the very moment that Aglaya commenced her declamation, two
new guests, both talking loudly, entered from the street. The new arrivals were
General Epanchin and a young man.
</p>

<p>
Their entrance caused some slight commotion.
</p>

<h3>VII.</h3>

<p>
The young fellow accompanying the general was about twenty-eight, tall, and
well built, with a handsome and clever face, and bright black eyes, full of fun
and intelligence.
</p>

<p>
Aglaya did not so much as glance at the new arrivals, but went on with her
recitation, gazing at the prince the while in an affected manner, and at him
alone. It was clear to him that she was doing all this with some special
object.
</p>

<p>
But the new guests at least somewhat eased his strained and uncomfortable
position. Seeing them approaching, he rose from his chair, and nodding amicably
to the general, signed to him not to interrupt the recitation. He then got
behind his chair, and stood there with his left hand resting on the back of it.
Thanks to this change of position, he was able to listen to the ballad with far
less embarrassment than before. Mrs. Epanchin had also twice motioned to the
new arrivals to be quiet, and stay where they were.
</p>

<p>
The prince was much interested in the young man who had just entered. He easily
concluded that this was Evgenie Pavlovitch Radomski, of whom he had already
heard mention several times. He was puzzled, however, by the young man’s
plain clothes, for he had always heard of Evgenie Pavlovitch as a military man.
An ironical smile played on Evgenie’s lips all the while the recitation
was proceeding, which showed that he, too, was probably in the secret of the
‘poor knight’ joke. But it had become quite a different matter with
Aglaya. All the affectation of manner which she had displayed at the beginning
disappeared as the ballad proceeded. She spoke the lines in so serious and
exalted a manner, and with so much taste, that she even seemed to justify the
exaggerated solemnity with which she had stepped forward. It was impossible to
discern in her now anything but a deep feeling for the spirit of the poem which
she had undertaken to interpret.
</p>

<p>
Her eyes were aglow with inspiration, and a slight tremor of rapture passed
over her lovely features once or twice. She continued to recite:
</p>

<p class="poem">
“Once there came a vision glorious,<br />
Mystic, dreadful, wondrous fair;<br />
Burned itself into his spirit,<br />
And abode for ever there!<br />
<br />
“Never more—from that sweet moment—<br />
Gazéd he on womankind;<br />
He was dumb to love and wooing<br />
And to all their graces blind.<br />
<br />
“Full of love for that sweet vision,<br />
Brave and pure he took the field;<br />
With his blood he stained the letters<br />
N. P. B. upon his shield.<br />
<br />
“‘Lumen caeli, sancta Rosa!’<br />
Shouting on the foe he fell,<br />
And like thunder rang his war-cry<br />
O’er the cowering infidel.<br />
<br />
“Then within his distant castle,<br />
Home returned, he dreamed his days—<br />
Silent, sad,—and when death took him<br />
He was mad, the legend says.”
</p>

<p>
When recalling all this afterwards the prince could not for the life of him
understand how to reconcile the beautiful, sincere, pure nature of the girl
with the irony of this jest. That it was a jest there was no doubt whatever; he
knew that well enough, and had good reason, too, for his conviction; for during
her recitation of the ballad Aglaya had deliberately changed the letters A. N.
B. into N. P. B. He was quite sure she had not done this by accident, and that
his ears had not deceived him. At all events her performance—which was a
joke, of course, if rather a crude one,—was premeditated. They had
evidently talked (and laughed) over the ‘poor knight’ for more than
a month.
</p>

<p>
Yet Aglaya had brought out these letters N. P. B. not only without the
slightest appearance of irony, or even any particular accentuation, but with so
even and unbroken an appearance of seriousness that assuredly anyone might have
supposed that these initials were the original ones written in the ballad. The
thing made an uncomfortable impression upon the prince. Of course Mrs. Epanchin
saw nothing either in the change of initials or in the insinuation embodied
therein. General Epanchin only knew that there was a recitation of verses going
on, and took no further interest in the matter. Of the rest of the audience,
many had understood the allusion and wondered both at the daring of the lady
and at the motive underlying it, but tried to show no sign of their feelings.
But Evgenie Pavlovitch (as the prince was ready to wager) both comprehended and
tried his best to show that he comprehended; his smile was too mocking to leave
any doubt on that point.
</p>

<p>
“How beautiful that is!” cried Mrs. Epanchin, with sincere
admiration. “Whose is it?”
</p>

<p>
“Pushkin’s, mama, of course! Don’t disgrace us all by showing
your ignorance,” said Adelaida.
</p>

<p>
“As soon as we reach home give it to me to read.”
</p>

<p>
“I don’t think we have a copy of Pushkin in the house.”
</p>

<p>
“There are a couple of torn volumes somewhere; they have been lying about
from time immemorial,” added Alexandra.
</p>

<p>
“Send Feodor or Alexey up by the very first train to buy a copy,
then.—Aglaya, come here—kiss me, dear, you recited beautifully!
but,” she added in a whisper, “if you were sincere I am sorry for
you. If it was a joke, I do not approve of the feelings which prompted you to
do it, and in any case you would have done far better not to recite it at all.
Do you understand?—Now come along, young woman; we’ve sat here too
long. I’ll speak to you about this another time.”
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the prince took the opportunity of greeting General Epanchin, and the
general introduced Evgenie Pavlovitch to him.
</p>

<p>
“I caught him up on the way to your house,” explained the general.
“He had heard that we were all here.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, and I heard that you were here, too,” added Evgenie
Pavlovitch; “and since I had long promised myself the pleasure of seeking
not only your acquaintance but your friendship, I did not wish to waste time,
but came straight on. I am sorry to hear that you are unwell.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, but I’m quite well now, thank you, and very glad to make your
acquaintance. Prince S. has often spoken to me about you,” said Muishkin,
and for an instant the two men looked intently into one another’s eyes.
</p>

<p>
The prince remarked that Evgenie Pavlovitch’s plain clothes had evidently
made a great impression upon the company present, so much so that all other
interests seemed to be effaced before this surprising fact.
</p>

<p>
His change of dress was evidently a matter of some importance. Adelaida and
Alexandra poured out a stream of questions; Prince S., a relative of the young
man, appeared annoyed; and Ivan Fedorovitch quite excited. Aglaya alone was not
interested. She merely looked closely at Evgenie for a minute, curious perhaps
as to whether civil or military clothes became him best, then turned away and
paid no more attention to him or his costume. Lizabetha Prokofievna asked no
questions, but it was clear that she was uneasy, and the prince fancied that
Evgenie was not in her good graces.
</p>

<p>
“He has astonished me,” said Ivan Fedorovitch. “I nearly fell
down with surprise. I could hardly believe my eyes when I met him in Petersburg
just now. Why this haste? That’s what I want to know. He has always said
himself that there is no need to break windows.”
</p>

<p>
Evgenie Pavlovitch remarked here that he had spoken of his intention of leaving
the service long ago. He had, however, always made more or less of a joke about
it, so no one had taken him seriously. For that matter he joked about
everything, and his friends never knew what to believe, especially if he did
not wish them to understand him.
</p>

<p>
“I have only retired for a time,” said he, laughing. “For a
few months; at most for a year.”
</p>

<p>
“But there is no necessity for you to retire at all,” complained
the general, “as far as I know.”
</p>

<p>
“I want to go and look after my country estates. You advised me to do
that yourself,” was the reply. “And then I wish to go
abroad.”
</p>

<p>
After a few more expostulations, the conversation drifted into other channels,
but the prince, who had been an attentive listener, thought all this excitement
about so small a matter very curious. “There must be more in it than
appears,” he said to himself.
</p>

<p>
“I see the ‘poor knight’ has come on the scene again,”
said Evgenie Pavlovitch, stepping to Aglaya’s side.
</p>

<p>
To the amazement of the prince, who overheard the remark, Aglaya looked
haughtily and inquiringly at the questioner, as though she would give him to
know, once for all, that there could be no talk between them about the
‘poor knight,’ and that she did not understand his question.
</p>

<p>
“But not now! It is too late to send to town for a Pushkin now. It is
much too late, I say!” Colia was exclaiming in a loud voice. “I
have told you so at least a hundred times.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, it is really much too late to send to town now,” said Evgenie
Pavlovitch, who had escaped from Aglaya as rapidly as possible. “I am
sure the shops are shut in Petersburg; it is past eight o’clock,”
he added, looking at his watch.
</p>

<p>
“We have done without him so far,” interrupted Adelaida in her
turn. “Surely we can wait until to-morrow.”
</p>

<p>
“Besides,” said Colia, “it is quite unusual, almost improper,
for people in our position to take any interest in literature. Ask Evgenie
Pavlovitch if I am not right. It is much more fashionable to drive a waggonette
with red wheels.”
</p>

<p>
“You got that from some magazine, Colia,” remarked Adelaida.
</p>

<p>
“He gets most of his conversation in that way,” laughed Evgenie
Pavlovitch. “He borrows whole phrases from the reviews. I have long had
the pleasure of knowing both Nicholai Ardalionovitch and his conversational
methods, but this time he was not repeating something he had read; he was
alluding, no doubt, to my yellow waggonette, which has, or had, red wheels. But
I have exchanged it, so you are rather behind the times, Colia.”
</p>

<p>
The prince had been listening attentively to Radomski’s words, and
thought his manner very pleasant. When Colia chaffed him about his waggonette
he had replied with perfect equality and in a friendly fashion. This pleased
Muishkin.
</p>

<p>
At this moment Vera came up to Lizabetha Prokofievna, carrying several large
and beautifully bound books, apparently quite new.
</p>

<p>
“What is it?” demanded the lady.
</p>

<p>
“This is Pushkin,” replied the girl. “Papa told me to offer
it to you.”
</p>

<p>
“What? Impossible!” exclaimed Mrs. Epanchin.
</p>

<p>
“Not as a present, not as a present! I should not have taken the
liberty,” said Lebedeff, appearing suddenly from behind his daughter.
“It is our own Pushkin, our family copy, Annenkoff’s edition; it
could not be bought now. I beg to suggest, with great respect, that your
excellency should buy it, and thus quench the noble literary thirst which is
consuming you at this moment,” he concluded grandiloquently.
</p>

<p>
“Oh! if you will sell it, very good—and thank you. You shall not be
a loser! But for goodness’ sake, don’t twist about like that, sir!
I have heard of you; they tell me you are a very learned person. We must have a
talk one of these days. You will bring me the books yourself?”
</p>

<p>
“With the greatest respect... and... and veneration,” replied
Lebedeff, making extraordinary grimaces.
</p>

<p>
“Well, bring them, with or without respect, provided always you do not
drop them on the way; but on the condition,” went on the lady, looking
full at him, “that you do not cross my threshold. I do not intend to
receive you today. You may send your daughter Vera at once, if you like. I am
much pleased with her.”
</p>

<p>
“Why don’t you tell him about them?” said Vera impatiently to
her father. “They will come in, whether you announce them or not, and
they are beginning to make a row. Lef Nicolaievitch,”—she addressed
herself to the prince—“four men are here asking for you. They have
waited some time, and are beginning to make a fuss, and papa will not bring
them in.”
</p>

<p>
“Who are these people?” said the prince.
</p>

<p>
“They say that they have come on business, and they are the kind of men,
who, if you do not see them here, will follow you about the street. It would be
better to receive them, and then you will get rid of them. Gavrila
Ardalionovitch and Ptitsin are both there, trying to make them hear
reason.”
</p>

<p>
“Pavlicheff’s son! It is not worth while!” cried Lebedeff.
“There is no necessity to see them, and it would be most unpleasant for
your excellency. They do not deserve...”
</p>

<p>
“What? Pavlicheff’s son!” cried the prince, much perturbed.
“I know... I know—but I entrusted this matter to Gavrila
Ardalionovitch. He told me...”
</p>

<p>
At that moment Gania, accompanied by Ptitsin, came out to the terrace. From an
adjoining room came a noise of angry voices, and General Ivolgin, in loud
tones, seemed to be trying to shout them down. Colia rushed off at once to
investigate the cause of the uproar.
</p>

<p>
“This is most interesting!” observed Evgenie Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
“I expect he knows all about it!” thought the prince.
</p>

<p>
“What, the son of Pavlicheff? And who may this son of Pavlicheff
be?” asked General Epanchin with surprise; and looking curiously around
him, he discovered that he alone had no clue to the mystery. Expectation and
suspense were on every face, with the exception of that of the prince, who
stood gravely wondering how an affair so entirely personal could have awakened
such lively and widespread interest in so short a time.
</p>

<p>
Aglaya went up to him with a peculiarly serious look.
</p>

<p>
“It will be well,” she said, “if you put an end to this
affair yourself <i>at once</i>: but you must allow us to be your witnesses.
They want to throw mud at you, prince, and you must be triumphantly vindicated.
I give you joy beforehand!”
</p>

<p>
“And I also wish for justice to be done, once for all,” cried
Madame Epanchin, “about this impudent claim. Deal with them promptly,
prince, and don’t spare them! I am sick of hearing about the affair, and
many a quarrel I have had in your cause. But I confess I am anxious to see what
happens, so do make them come out here, and we will remain. You have heard
people talking about it, no doubt?” she added, turning to Prince S.
</p>

<p>
“Of course,” said he. “I have heard it spoken about at your
house, and I am anxious to see these young men!”
</p>

<p>
“They are Nihilists, are they not?”
</p>

<p>
“No, they are not Nihilists,” explained Lebedeff, who seemed much
excited. “This is another lot—a special group. According to my
nephew they are more advanced even than the Nihilists. You are quite wrong,
excellency, if you think that your presence will intimidate them; nothing
intimidates them. Educated men, learned men even, are to be found among
Nihilists; these go further, in that they are men of action. The movement is,
properly speaking, a derivative from Nihilism—though they are only known
indirectly, and by hearsay, for they never advertise their doings in the
papers. They go straight to the point. For them, it is not a question of
showing that Pushkin is stupid, or that Russia must be torn in pieces. No; but
if they have a great desire for anything, they believe they have a right to get
it even at the cost of the lives, say, of eight persons. They are checked by no
obstacles. In fact, prince, I should not advise you...”
</p>

<p>
But Muishkin had risen, and was on his way to open the door for his visitors.
</p>

<p>
“You are slandering them, Lebedeff,” said he, smiling.
</p>

<p>
“You are always thinking about your nephew’s conduct. Don’t
believe him, Lizabetha Prokofievna. I can assure you Gorsky and Daniloff are
exceptions—and that these are only... mistaken. However, I do not care
about receiving them here, in public. Excuse me, Lizabetha Prokofievna. They
are coming, and you can see them, and then I will take them away. Please come
in, gentlemen!”
</p>

<p>
Another thought tormented him: He wondered was this an arranged
business—arranged to happen when he had guests in his house, and in
anticipation of his humiliation rather than of his triumph? But he reproached
himself bitterly for such a thought, and felt as if he should die of shame if
it were discovered. When his new visitors appeared, he was quite ready to
believe himself infinitely less to be respected than any of them.
</p>

<p>
Four persons entered, led by General Ivolgin, in a state of great excitement,
and talking eloquently.
</p>

<p>
“He is for me, undoubtedly!” thought the prince, with a smile.
Colia also had joined the party, and was talking with animation to Hippolyte,
who listened with a jeering smile on his lips.
</p>

<p>
The prince begged the visitors to sit down. They were all so young that it made
the proceedings seem even more extraordinary. Ivan Fedorovitch, who really
understood nothing of what was going on, felt indignant at the sight of these
youths, and would have interfered in some way had it not been for the extreme
interest shown by his wife in the affair. He therefore remained, partly through
curiosity, partly through good-nature, hoping that his presence might be of
some use. But the bow with which General Ivolgin greeted him irritated him
anew; he frowned, and decided to be absolutely silent.
</p>

<p>
As to the rest, one was a man of thirty, the retired officer, now a boxer, who
had been with Rogojin, and in his happier days had given fifteen roubles at a
time to beggars. Evidently he had joined the others as a comrade to give them
moral, and if necessary material, support. The man who had been spoken of as
“Pavlicheff’s son,” although he gave the name of Antip
Burdovsky, was about twenty-two years of age, fair, thin and rather tall. He
was remarkable for the poverty, not to say uncleanliness, of his personal
appearance: the sleeves of his overcoat were greasy; his dirty waistcoat,
buttoned up to his neck, showed not a trace of linen; a filthy black silk
scarf, twisted till it resembled a cord, was round his neck, and his hands were
unwashed. He looked round with an air of insolent effrontery. His face, covered
with pimples, was neither thoughtful nor even contemptuous; it wore an
expression of complacent satisfaction in demanding his rights and in being an
aggrieved party. His voice trembled, and he spoke so fast, and with such
stammerings, that he might have been taken for a foreigner, though the purest
Russian blood ran in his veins. Lebedeff’s nephew, whom the reader has
seen already, accompanied him, and also the youth named Hippolyte Terentieff.
The latter was only seventeen or eighteen. He had an intelligent face, though
it was usually irritated and fretful in expression. His skeleton-like figure,
his ghastly complexion, the brightness of his eyes, and the red spots of colour
on his cheeks, betrayed the victim of consumption to the most casual glance. He
coughed persistently, and panted for breath; it looked as though he had but a
few weeks more to live. He was nearly dead with fatigue, and fell, rather than
sat, into a chair. The rest bowed as they came in; and being more or less
abashed, put on an air of extreme self-assurance. In short, their attitude was
not that which one would have expected in men who professed to despise all
trivialities, all foolish mundane conventions, and indeed everything, except
their own personal interests.
</p>

<p>
“Antip Burdovsky,” stuttered the son of Pavlicheff.
</p>

<p>
“Vladimir Doktorenko,” said Lebedeff’s nephew briskly, and
with a certain pride, as if he boasted of his name.
</p>

<p>
“Keller,” murmured the retired officer.
</p>

<p>
“Hippolyte Terentieff,” cried the last-named, in a shrill voice.
</p>

<p>
They sat now in a row facing the prince, and frowned, and played with their
caps. All appeared ready to speak, and yet all were silent; the defiant
expression on their faces seemed to say, “No, sir, you don’t take
us in!” It could be felt that the first word spoken by anyone present
would bring a torrent of speech from the whole deputation.
</p>

<h3>VIII.</h3>

<p>
“I <i>did</i> not expect you, gentlemen,” began the prince.
“I have been ill until to-day. A month ago,” he continued,
addressing himself to Antip Burdovsky, “I put your business into Gavrila
Ardalionovitch Ivolgin’s hands, as I told you then. I do not in the least
object to having a personal interview... but you will agree with me that this
is hardly the time... I propose that we go into another room, if you will not
keep me long... As you see, I have friends here, and believe me...”
</p>

<p>
“Friends as many as you please, but allow me,” interrupted the
harsh voice of Lebedeff’s nephew—“allow me to tell you that
you might have treated us rather more politely, and not have kept us waiting at
least two hours...
</p>

<p>
“No doubt... and I... is that acting like a prince? And you... you may be
a general! But I... I am not your valet! And I... I...” stammered Antip
Burdovsky.
</p>

<p>
He was extremely excited; his lips trembled, and the resentment of an
embittered soul was in his voice. But he spoke so indistinctly that hardly a
dozen words could be gathered.
</p>

<p>
“It was a princely action!” sneered Hippolyte.
</p>

<p>
“If anyone had treated me so,” grumbled the boxer.
</p>

<p>
“I mean to say that if I had been in Burdovsky’s
place...I...”
</p>

<p>
“Gentlemen, I did not know you were there; I have only just been
informed, I assure you,” repeated Muishkin.
</p>

<p>
“We are not afraid of your friends, prince,” remarked
Lebedeff’s nephew, “for we are within our rights.”
</p>

<p>
The shrill tones of Hippolyte interrupted him. “What right have you... by
what right do you demand us to submit this matter, about Burdovsky... to the
judgment of your friends? We know only too well what the judgment of your
friends will be!...”
</p>

<p>
This beginning gave promise of a stormy discussion. The prince was much
discouraged, but at last he managed to make himself heard amid the
vociferations of his excited visitors.
</p>

<p>
“If you,” he said, addressing Burdovsky—“if you prefer
not to speak here, I offer again to go into another room with you... and as to
your waiting to see me, I repeat that I only this instant heard...”
</p>

<p>
“Well, you have no right, you have no right, no right at all!... Your
friends indeed!”... gabbled Burdovsky, defiantly examining the faces
round him, and becoming more and more excited. “You have no
right!...” As he ended thus abruptly, he leant forward, staring at the
prince with his short-sighted, bloodshot eyes. The latter was so astonished,
that he did not reply, but looked steadily at him in return.
</p>

<p>
“Lef Nicolaievitch!” interposed Madame Epanchin, suddenly,
“read this at once, this very moment! It is about this business.”
</p>

<p>
She held out a weekly comic paper, pointing to an article on one of its pages.
Just as the visitors were coming in, Lebedeff, wishing to ingratiate himself
with the great lady, had pulled this paper from his pocket, and presented it to
her, indicating a few columns marked in pencil. Lizabetha Prokofievna had had
time to read some of it, and was greatly upset.
</p>

<p>
“Would it not be better to peruse it alone... later,” asked the
prince, nervously.
</p>

<p>
“No, no, read it—read it at once directly, and aloud, aloud!”
cried she, calling Colia to her and giving him the journal.—“Read
it aloud, so that everyone may hear it!”
</p>

<p>
An impetuous woman, Lizabetha Prokofievna sometimes weighed her anchors and put
out to sea quite regardless of the possible storms she might encounter. Ivan
Fedorovitch felt a sudden pang of alarm, but the others were merely curious,
and somewhat surprised. Colia unfolded the paper, and began to read, in his
clear, high-pitched voice, the following article:
</p>

<p class="p2">
“Proletarians and scions of nobility! An episode of the brigandage of
today and every day! Progress! Reform! Justice!”
</p>

<p>
“Strange things are going on in our so-called Holy Russia in this age of
reform and great enterprises; this age of patriotism in which hundreds of
millions are yearly sent abroad; in which industry is encouraged, and the hands
of Labour paralyzed, etc.; there is no end to this, gentlemen, so let us come
to the point. A strange thing has happened to a scion of our defunct
aristocracy. (<i>De profundis!</i>) The grandfathers of these scions ruined
themselves at the gaming-tables; their fathers were forced to serve as officers
or subalterns; some have died just as they were about to be tried for innocent
thoughtlessness in the handling of public funds. Their children are sometimes
congenital idiots, like the hero of our story; sometimes they are found in the
dock at the Assizes, where they are generally acquitted by the jury for
edifying motives; sometimes they distinguish themselves by one of those burning
scandals that amaze the public and add another blot to the stained record of
our age. Six months ago—that is, last winter—this particular scion
returned to Russia, wearing gaiters like a foreigner, and shivering with cold
in an old scantily-lined cloak. He had come from Switzerland, where he had just
undergone a successful course of treatment for idiocy (<i>sic!</i>). Certainly
Fortune favoured him, for, apart from the interesting malady of which he was
cured in Switzerland (can there be a cure for idiocy?) his story proves the
truth of the Russian proverb that ‘happiness is the right of certain
classes!’ Judge for yourselves. Our subject was an infant in arms when he
lost his father, an officer who died just as he was about to be
court-martialled for gambling away the funds of his company, and perhaps also
for flogging a subordinate to excess (remember the good old days, gentlemen).
The orphan was brought up by the charity of a very rich Russian landowner. In
the good old days, this man, whom we will call P——, owned four
thousand souls as serfs (souls as serfs!—can you understand such an
expression, gentlemen? I cannot; it must be looked up in a dictionary before
one can understand it; these things of a bygone day are already unintelligible
to us). He appears to have been one of those Russian parasites who lead an idle
existence abroad, spending the summer at some spa, and the winter in Paris, to
the greater profit of the organizers of public balls. It may safely be said
that the manager of the Chateau des Fleurs (lucky man!) pocketed at least a
third of the money paid by Russian peasants to their lords in the days of
serfdom. However this may be, the gay P—— brought up the orphan
like a prince, provided him with tutors and governesses (pretty, of course!)
whom he chose himself in Paris. But the little aristocrat, the last of his
noble race, was an idiot. The governesses, recruited at the Chateau des Fleurs,
laboured in vain; at twenty years of age their pupil could not speak in any
language, not even Russian. But ignorance of the latter was still excusable. At
last P—— was seized with a strange notion; he imagined that in
Switzerland they could change an idiot into a man of sense. After all, the idea
was quite logical; a parasite and landowner naturally supposed that
intelligence was a marketable commodity like everything else, and that in
Switzerland especially it could be bought for money. The case was entrusted to
a celebrated Swiss professor, and cost thousands of roubles; the treatment
lasted five years. Needless to say, the idiot did not become intelligent, but
it is alleged that he grew into something more or less resembling a man. At
this stage P—— died suddenly, and, as usual, he had made no will
and left his affairs in disorder. A crowd of eager claimants arose, who cared
nothing about any last scion of a noble race undergoing treatment in
Switzerland, at the expense of the deceased, as a congenital idiot. Idiot
though he was, the noble scion tried to cheat his professor, and they say he
succeeded in getting him to continue the treatment gratis for two years, by
concealing the death of his benefactor. But the professor himself was a
charlatan. Getting anxious at last when no money was forthcoming, and alarmed
above all by his patient’s appetite, he presented him with a pair of old
gaiters and a shabby cloak and packed him off to Russia, third class. It would
seem that Fortune had turned her back upon our hero. Not at all; Fortune, who
lets whole populations die of hunger, showered all her gifts at once upon the
little aristocrat, like Kryloff’s Cloud which passes over an arid plain
and empties itself into the sea. He had scarcely arrived in St. Petersburg,
when a relation of his mother’s (who was of bourgeois origin, of course),
died at Moscow. He was a merchant, an Old Believer, and he had no children. He
left a fortune of several millions in good current coin, and everything came to
our noble scion, our gaitered baron, formerly treated for idiocy in a Swiss
lunatic asylum. Instantly the scene changed, crowds of friends gathered round
our baron, who meanwhile had lost his head over a celebrated demi-mondaine; he
even discovered some relations; moreover a number of young girls of high birth
burned to be united to him in lawful matrimony. Could anyone possibly imagine a
better match? Aristocrat, millionaire, and idiot, he has every advantage! One
might hunt in vain for his equal, even with the lantern of Diogenes; his like
is not to be had even by getting it made to order!”
</p>

<p class="p2">
“Oh, I don’t know what this means” cried Ivan Fedorovitch,
transported with indignation.
</p>

<p>
“Leave off, Colia,” begged the prince. Exclamations arose on all
sides.
</p>

<p>
“Let him go on reading at all costs!” ordered Lizabetha
Prokofievna, evidently preserving her composure by a desperate effort.
“Prince, if the reading is stopped, you and I will quarrel.”
</p>

<p>
Colia had no choice but to obey. With crimson cheeks he read on unsteadily:
</p>

<p class="p2">
“But while our young millionaire dwelt as it were in the Empyrean,
something new occurred. One fine morning a man called upon him, calm and severe
of aspect, distinguished, but plainly dressed. Politely, but in dignified
terms, as befitted his errand, he briefly explained the motive for his visit.
He was a lawyer of enlightened views; his client was a young man who had
consulted him in confidence. This young man was no other than the son of
P——, though he bears another name. In his youth P——,
the sensualist, had seduced a young girl, poor but respectable. She was a serf,
but had received a European education. Finding that a child was expected, he
hastened her marriage with a man of noble character who had loved her for a
long time. He helped the young couple for a time, but he was soon obliged to
give up, for the high-minded husband refused to accept anything from him. Soon
the careless nobleman forgot all about his former mistress and the child she
had borne him; then, as we know, he died intestate. P——’s
son, born after his mother’s marriage, found a true father in the
generous man whose name he bore. But when he also died, the orphan was left to
provide for himself, his mother now being an invalid who had lost the use of
her limbs. Leaving her in a distant province, he came to the capital in search
of pupils. By dint of daily toil he earned enough to enable him to follow the
college courses, and at last to enter the university. But what can one earn by
teaching the children of Russian merchants at ten copecks a lesson, especially
with an invalid mother to keep? Even her death did not much diminish the
hardships of the young man’s struggle for existence. Now this is the
question: how, in the name of justice, should our scion have argued the case?
Our readers will think, no doubt, that he would say to himself:
‘P—— showered benefits upon me all my life; he spent tens of
thousands of roubles to educate me, to provide me with governesses, and to keep
me under treatment in Switzerland. Now I am a millionaire, and
P——’s son, a noble young man who is not responsible for the
faults of his careless and forgetful father, is wearing himself out giving
ill-paid lessons. According to justice, all that was done for me ought to have
been done for him. The enormous sums spent upon me were not really mine; they
came to me by an error of blind Fortune, when they ought to have gone to
P——’s son. They should have gone to benefit him, not me, in
whom P—— interested himself by a mere caprice, instead of doing his
duty as a father. If I wished to behave nobly, justly, and with delicacy, I
ought to bestow half my fortune upon the son of my benefactor; but as economy
is my favourite virtue, and I know this is not a case in which the law can
intervene, I will not give up half my millions. But it would be too openly
vile, too flagrantly infamous, if I did not at least restore to
P——’s son the tens of thousands of roubles spent in curing my
idiocy. This is simply a case of conscience and of strict justice. Whatever
would have become of me if P—— had not looked after my education,
and had taken care of his own son instead of me?’
</p>

<p>
“No, gentlemen, our scions of the nobility do not reason thus. The
lawyer, who had taken up the matter purely out of friendship to the young man,
and almost against his will, invoked every consideration of justice, delicacy,
honour, and even plain figures; in vain, the ex-patient of the Swiss lunatic
asylum was inflexible. All this might pass, but the sequel is absolutely
unpardonable, and not to be excused by any interesting malady. This
millionaire, having but just discarded the old gaiters of his professor, could
not even understand that the noble young man slaving away at his lessons was
not asking for charitable help, but for his rightful due, though the debt was
not a legal one; that, correctly speaking, he was not asking for anything, but
it was merely his friends who had thought fit to bestir themselves on his
behalf. With the cool insolence of a bloated capitalist, secure in his
millions, he majestically drew a banknote for fifty roubles from his
pocket-book and sent it to the noble young man as a humiliating piece of
charity. You can hardly believe it, gentlemen! You are scandalized and
disgusted; you cry out in indignation! But that is what he did! Needless to
say, the money was returned, or rather flung back in his face. The case is not
within the province of the law, it must be referred to the tribunal of public
opinion; this is what we now do, guaranteeing the truth of all the details
which we have related.”
</p>

<p class="p2">
When Colia had finished reading, he handed the paper to the prince, and retired
silently to a corner of the room, hiding his face in his hands. He was overcome
by a feeling of inexpressible shame; his boyish sensitiveness was wounded
beyond endurance. It seemed to him that something extraordinary, some sudden
catastrophe had occurred, and that he was almost the cause of it, because he
had read the article aloud.
</p>

<p>
Yet all the others were similarly affected. The girls were uncomfortable and
ashamed. Lizabetha Prokofievna restrained her violent anger by a great effort;
perhaps she bitterly regretted her interference in the matter; for the present
she kept silence. The prince felt as very shy people often do in such a case;
he was so ashamed of the conduct of other people, so humiliated for his guests,
that he dared not look them in the face. Ptitsin, Varia, Gania, and Lebedeff
himself, all looked rather confused. Stranger still, Hippolyte and the
“son of Pavlicheff” also seemed slightly surprised, and
Lebedeff’s nephew was obviously far from pleased. The boxer alone was
perfectly calm; he twisted his moustaches with affected dignity, and if his
eyes were cast down it was certainly not in confusion, but rather in noble
modesty, as if he did not wish to be insolent in his triumph. It was evident
that he was delighted with the article.
</p>

<p>
“The devil knows what it means,” growled Ivan Fedorovitch, under
his breath; “it must have taken the united wits of fifty footmen to write
it.”
</p>

<p>
“May I ask your reason for such an insulting supposition, sir?”
said Hippolyte, trembling with rage.
</p>

<p>
“You will admit yourself, general, that for an honourable man, if the
author is an honourable man, that is an—an insult,” growled the
boxer suddenly, with convulsive jerkings of his shoulders.
</p>

<p>
“In the first place, it is not for you to address me as
‘sir,’ and, in the second place, I refuse to give you any
explanation,” said Ivan Fedorovitch vehemently; and he rose without
another word, and went and stood on the first step of the flight that led from
the verandah to the street, turning his back on the company. He was indignant
with Lizabetha Prokofievna, who did not think of moving even now.
</p>

<p>
“Gentlemen, gentlemen, let me speak at last,” cried the prince,
anxious and agitated. “Please let us understand one another. I say
nothing about the article, gentlemen, except that every word is false; I say
this because you know it as well as I do. It is shameful. I should be surprised
if any one of you could have written it.”
</p>

<p>
“I did not know of its existence till this moment,” declared
Hippolyte. “I do not approve of it.”
</p>

<p>
“I knew it had been written, but I would not have advised its
publication,” said Lebedeff’s nephew, “because it is
premature.”
</p>

<p>
“I knew it, but I have a right. I... I...” stammered the “son
of Pavlicheff.”
</p>

<p>
“What! Did you write all that yourself? Is it possible?” asked the
prince, regarding Burdovsky with curiosity.
</p>

<p>
“One might dispute your right to ask such questions,” observed
Lebedeff’s nephew.
</p>

<p>
“I was only surprised that Mr. Burdovsky should have—however, this
is what I have to say. Since you had already given the matter publicity, why
did you object just now, when I began to speak of it to my friends?”
</p>

<p>
“At last!” murmured Lizabetha Prokofievna indignantly.
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff could restrain himself no longer; he made his way through the row of
chairs.
</p>

<p>
“Prince,” he cried, “you are forgetting that if you consented
to receive and hear them, it was only because of your kind heart which has no
equal, for they had not the least right to demand it, especially as you had
placed the matter in the hands of Gavrila Ardalionovitch, which was also
extremely kind of you. You are also forgetting, most excellent prince, that you
are with friends, a select company; you cannot sacrifice them to these
gentlemen, and it is only for you to have them turned out this instant. As the
master of the house I shall have great pleasure ....”
</p>

<p>
“Quite right!” agreed General Ivolgin in a loud voice.
</p>

<p>
“That will do, Lebedeff, that will do—” began the prince,
when an indignant outcry drowned his words.
</p>

<p>
“Excuse me, prince, excuse me, but now that will not do,” shouted
Lebedeff’s nephew, his voice dominating all the others. “The matter
must be clearly stated, for it is obviously not properly understood. They are
calling in some legal chicanery, and upon that ground they are threatening to
turn us out of the house! Really, prince, do you think we are such fools as not
to be aware that this matter does not come within the law, and that legally we
cannot claim a rouble from you? But we are also aware that if actual law is not
on our side, human law is for us, natural law, the law of common-sense and
conscience, which is no less binding upon every noble and honest man—that
is, every man of sane judgment—because it is not to be found in miserable
legal codes. If we come here without fear of being turned out (as was
threatened just now) because of the imperative tone of our demand, and the
unseemliness of such a visit at this late hour (though it was not late when we
arrived, we were kept waiting in your anteroom), if, I say, we came in without
fear, it is just because we expected to find you a man of sense; I mean, a man
of honour and conscience. It is quite true that we did not present ourselves
humbly, like your flatterers and parasites, but holding up our heads as befits
independent men. We present no petition, but a proud and free demand (note it
well, we do not beseech, we demand!). We ask you fairly and squarely in a
dignified manner. Do you believe that in this affair of Burdovsky you have
right on your side? Do you admit that Pavlicheff overwhelmed you with benefits,
and perhaps saved your life? If you admit it (which we take for granted), do
you intend, now that you are a millionaire, and do you not think it in
conformity with justice, to indemnify Burdovsky? Yes or no? If it is yes, or,
in other words, if you possess what you call honour and conscience, and we more
justly call common-sense, then accede to our demand, and the matter is at an
end. Give us satisfaction, without entreaties or thanks from us; do not expect
thanks from us, for what you do will be done not for our sake, but for the sake
of justice. If you refuse to satisfy us, that is, if your answer is no, we will
go away at once, and there will be an end of the matter. But we will tell you
to your face before the present company that you are a man of vulgar and
undeveloped mind; we will openly deny you the right to speak in future of your
honour and conscience, for you have not paid the fair price of such a right. I
have no more to say—I have put the question before you. Now turn us out
if you dare. You can do it; force is on your side. But remember that we do not
beseech, we demand! We do not beseech, we demand!”
</p>

<p>
With these last excited words, Lebedeff’s nephew was silent.
</p>

<p>
“We demand, we demand, we demand, we do not beseech,” spluttered
Burdovsky, red as a lobster.
</p>

<p>
The speech of Lebedeff’s nephew caused a certain stir among the company;
murmurs arose, though with the exception of Lebedeff, who was still very much
excited, everyone was careful not to interfere in the matter. Strangely enough,
Lebedeff, although on the prince’s side, seemed quite proud of his
nephew’s eloquence. Gratified vanity was visible in the glances he cast
upon the assembled company.
</p>

<p>
“In my opinion, Mr. Doktorenko,” said the prince, in rather a low
voice, “you are quite right in at least half of what you say. I would go
further and say that you are altogether right, and that I quite agree with you,
if there were not something lacking in your speech. I cannot undertake to say
precisely what it is, but you have certainly omitted something, and you cannot
be quite just while there is something lacking. But let us put that aside and
return to the point. Tell me what induced you to publish this article. Every
word of it is a calumny, and I think, gentlemen, that you have been guilty of a
mean action.”
</p>

<p>
“Allow me—”
</p>

<p>
“Sir—”
</p>

<p>
“What? What? What?” cried all the visitors at once, in violent
agitation.
</p>

<p>
“As to the article,” said Hippolyte in his croaking voice, “I
have told you already that we none of us approve of it! There is the
writer,” he added, pointing to the boxer, who sat beside him. “I
quite admit that he has written it in his old regimental manner, with an equal
disregard for style and decency. I know he is a cross between a fool and an
adventurer; I make no bones about telling him so to his face every day. But
after all he is half justified; publicity is the lawful right of every man;
consequently, Burdovsky is not excepted. Let him answer for his own blunders.
As to the objection which I made just now in the name of all, to the presence
of your friends, I think I ought to explain, gentlemen, that I only did so to
assert our rights, though we really wished to have witnesses; we had agreed
unanimously upon the point before we came in. We do not care who your witnesses
may be, or whether they are your friends or not. As they cannot fail to
recognize Burdovsky’s right (seeing that it is mathematically
demonstrable), it is just as well that the witnesses should be your friends.
The truth will only be more plainly evident.”
</p>

<p>
“It is quite true; we had agreed upon that point,” said
Lebedeff’s nephew, in confirmation.
</p>

<p>
“If that is the case, why did you begin by making such a fuss about
it?” asked the astonished prince.
</p>

<p>
The boxer was dying to get in a few words; owing, no doubt, to the presence of
the ladies, he was becoming quite jovial.
</p>

<p>
“As to the article, prince,” he said, “I admit that I wrote
it, in spite of the severe criticism of my poor friend, in whom I always
overlook many things because of his unfortunate state of health. But I wrote
and published it in the form of a letter, in the paper of a friend. I showed it
to no one but Burdovsky, and I did not read it all through, even to him. He
immediately gave me permission to publish it, but you will admit that I might
have done so without his consent. Publicity is a noble, beneficent, and
universal right. I hope, prince, that you are too progressive to deny
this?”
</p>

<p>
“I deny nothing, but you must confess that your article—”
</p>

<p>
“Is a bit thick, you mean? Well, in a way that is in the public interest;
you will admit that yourself, and after all one cannot overlook a blatant fact.
So much the worse for the guilty parties, but the public welfare must come
before everything. As to certain inaccuracies and figures of speech, so to
speak, you will also admit that the motive, aim, and intention, are the chief
thing. It is a question, above all, of making a wholesome example; the
individual case can be examined afterwards; and as to the style—well, the
thing was meant to be humorous, so to speak, and, after all, everybody writes
like that; you must admit it yourself! Ha, ha!”
</p>

<p>
“But, gentlemen, I assure you that you are quite astray,” exclaimed
the prince. “You have published this article upon the supposition that I
would never consent to satisfy Mr. Burdovsky. Acting on that conviction, you
have tried to intimidate me by this publication and to be revenged for my
supposed refusal. But what did you know of my intentions? It may be that I have
resolved to satisfy Mr. Burdovsky’s claim. I now declare openly, in the
presence of these witnesses, that I will do so.”
</p>

<p>
“The noble and intelligent word of an intelligent and most noble man, at
last!” exclaimed the boxer.
</p>

<p>
“Good God!” exclaimed Lizabetha Prokofievna involuntarily.
</p>

<p>
“This is intolerable,” growled the general.
</p>

<p>
“Allow me, gentlemen, allow me,” urged the prince.
</p>

<p>
“I will explain matters to you. Five weeks ago I received a visit from
Tchebaroff, your agent, Mr. Burdovsky. You have given a very flattering
description of him in your article, Mr. Keller,” he continued, turning to
the boxer with a smile, “but he did not please me at all. I saw at once
that Tchebaroff was the moving spirit in the matter, and, to speak frankly, I
thought he might have induced you, Mr. Burdovsky, to make this claim, by taking
advantage of your simplicity.”
</p>

<p>
“You have no right.... I am not simple,” stammered Burdovsky, much
agitated.
</p>

<p>
“You have no sort of right to suppose such things,” said
Lebedeff’s nephew in a tone of authority.
</p>

<p>
“It is most offensive!” shrieked Hippolyte; “it is an
insulting suggestion, false, and most ill-timed.”
</p>

<p>
“I beg your pardon, gentlemen; please excuse me,” said the prince.
“I thought absolute frankness on both sides would be best, but have it
your own way. I told Tchebaroff that, as I was not in Petersburg, I would
commission a friend to look into the matter without delay, and that I would let
you know, Mr. Burdovsky. Gentlemen, I have no hesitation in telling you that it
was the fact of Tchebaroff’s intervention that made me suspect a fraud.
Oh! do not take offence at my words, gentlemen, for Heaven’s sake do not
be so touchy!” cried the prince, seeing that Burdovsky was getting
excited again, and that the rest were preparing to protest. “If I say I
suspected a fraud, there is nothing personal in that. I had never seen any of
you then; I did not even know your names; I only judged by Tchebaroff; I am
speaking quite generally—if you only knew how I have been
‘done’ since I came into my fortune!”
</p>

<p>
“You are shockingly naive, prince,” said Lebedeff’s nephew in
mocking tones.
</p>

<p>
“Besides, though you are a prince and a millionaire, and even though you
may really be simple and good-hearted, you can hardly be outside the general
law,” Hippolyte declared loudly.
</p>

<p>
“Perhaps not; it is very possible,” the prince agreed hastily,
“though I do not know what general law you allude to. I will go
on—only please do not take offence without good cause. I assure you I do
not mean to offend you in the least. Really, it is impossible to speak three
words sincerely without your flying into a rage! At first I was amazed when
Tchebaroff told me that Pavlicheff had a son, and that he was in such a
miserable position. Pavlicheff was my benefactor, and my father’s friend.
Oh, Mr. Keller, why does your article impute things to my father without the
slightest foundation? He never squandered the funds of his company nor
ill-treated his subordinates, I am absolutely certain of it; I cannot imagine
how you could bring yourself to write such a calumny! But your assertions
concerning Pavlicheff are absolutely intolerable! You do not scruple to make a
libertine of that noble man; you call him a sensualist as coolly as if you were
speaking the truth, and yet it would not be possible to find a chaster man. He
was even a scholar of note, and in correspondence with several celebrated
scientists, and spent large sums in the interests of science. As to his kind
heart and his good actions, you were right indeed when you said that I was
almost an idiot at that time, and could hardly understand anything—(I
could speak and understand Russian, though),—but now I can appreciate
what I remember—”
</p>

<p>
“Excuse me,” interrupted Hippolyte, “is not this rather
sentimental? You said you wished to come to the point; please remember that it
is after nine o’clock.”
</p>

<p>
“Very well, gentlemen—very well,” replied the prince.
“At first I received the news with mistrust, then I said to myself that I
might be mistaken, and that Pavlicheff might possibly have had a son. But I was
absolutely amazed at the readiness with which the son had revealed the secret
of his birth at the expense of his mother’s honour. For Tchebaroff had
already menaced me with publicity in our interview....”
</p>

<p>
“What nonsense!” Lebedeff’s nephew interrupted violently.
</p>

<p>
“You have no right—you have no right!” cried Burdovsky.
</p>

<p>
“The son is not responsible for the misdeeds of his father; and the
mother is not to blame,” added Hippolyte, with warmth.
</p>

<p>
“That seems to me all the more reason for sparing her,” said the
prince timidly.
</p>

<p>
“Prince, you are not only simple, but your simplicity is almost past the
limit,” said Lebedeff’s nephew, with a sarcastic smile.
</p>

<p>
“But what right had you?” said Hippolyte in a very strange tone.
</p>

<p>
“None—none whatever,” agreed the prince hastily. “I
admit you are right there, but it was involuntary, and I immediately said to
myself that my personal feelings had nothing to do with it,—that if I
thought it right to satisfy the demands of Mr. Burdovsky, out of respect for
the memory of Pavlicheff, I ought to do so in any case, whether I esteemed Mr.
Burdovsky or not. I only mentioned this, gentlemen, because it seemed so
unnatural to me for a son to betray his mother’s secret in such a way. In
short, that is what convinced me that Tchebaroff must be a rogue, and that he
had induced Mr. Burdovsky to attempt this fraud.”
</p>

<p>
“But this is intolerable!” cried the visitors, some of them
starting to their feet.
</p>

<p>
“Gentlemen, I supposed from this that poor Mr. Burdovsky must be a
simple-minded man, quite defenceless, and an easy tool in the hands of rogues.
That is why I thought it my duty to try and help him as
‘Pavlicheff’s son’; in the first place by rescuing him from
the influence of Tchebaroff, and secondly by making myself his friend. I have
resolved to give him ten thousand roubles; that is about the sum which I
calculate that Pavlicheff must have spent on me.”
</p>

<p>
“What, only ten thousand!” cried Hippolyte.
</p>

<p>
“Well, prince, your arithmetic is not up to much, or else you are mighty
clever at it, though you affect the air of a simpleton,” said
Lebedeff’s nephew.
</p>

<p>
“I will not accept ten thousand roubles,” said Burdovsky.
</p>

<p>
“Accept, Antip,” whispered the boxer eagerly, leaning past the back
of Hippolyte’s chair to give his friend this piece of advice. “Take
it for the present; we can see about more later on.”
</p>

<p>
“Look here, Mr. Muishkin,” shouted Hippolyte, “please
understand that we are not fools, nor idiots, as your guests seem to imagine;
these ladies who look upon us with such scorn, and especially this fine
gentleman” (pointing to Evgenie Pavlovitch) “whom I have not the
honour of knowing, though I think I have heard some talk about
him—”
</p>

<p>
“Really, really, gentlemen,” cried the prince in great agitation,
“you are misunderstanding me again. In the first place, Mr. Keller, you
have greatly overestimated my fortune in your article. I am far from being a
millionaire. I have barely a tenth of what you suppose. Secondly, my treatment
in Switzerland was very far from costing tens of thousands of roubles.
Schneider received six hundred roubles a year, and he was only paid for the
first three years. As to the pretty governesses whom Pavlicheff is supposed to
have brought from Paris, they only exist in Mr. Keller’s imagination; it
is another calumny. According to my calculations, the sum spent on me was very
considerably under ten thousand roubles, but I decided on that sum, and you
must admit that in paying a debt I could not offer Mr. Burdovsky more, however
kindly disposed I might be towards him; delicacy forbids it; I should seem to
be offering him charity instead of rightful payment. I don’t know how you
cannot see that, gentlemen! Besides, I had no intention of leaving the matter
there. I meant to intervene amicably later on and help to improve poor Mr.
Burdovsky’s position. It is clear that he has been deceived, or he would
never have agreed to anything so vile as the scandalous revelations about his
mother in Mr. Keller’s article. But, gentlemen, why are you getting angry
again? Are we never to come to an understanding? Well, the event has proved me
right! I have just seen with my own eyes the proof that my conjecture was
correct!” he added, with increasing eagerness.
</p>

<p>
He meant to calm his hearers, and did not perceive that his words had only
increased their irritation.
</p>

<p>
“What do you mean? What are you convinced of?” they demanded
angrily.
</p>

<p>
“In the first place, I have had the opportunity of getting a correct idea
of Mr. Burdovsky. I see what he is for myself. He is an innocent man, deceived
by everyone! A defenceless victim, who deserves indulgence! Secondly, Gavrila
Ardalionovitch, in whose hands I had placed the matter, had his first interview
with me barely an hour ago. I had not heard from him for some time, as I was
away, and have been ill for three days since my return to St. Petersburg. He
tells me that he has exposed the designs of Tchebaroff and has proof that
justifies my opinion of him. I know, gentlemen, that many people think me an
idiot. Counting upon my reputation as a man whose purse-strings are easily
loosened, Tchebaroff thought it would be a simple matter to fleece me,
especially by trading on my gratitude to Pavlicheff. But the main point
is—listen, gentlemen, let me finish!—the main point is that Mr.
Burdovsky is not Pavlicheff’s son at all. Gavrila Ardalionovitch has just
told me of his discovery, and assures me that he has positive proofs. Well,
what do you think of that? It is scarcely credible, even after all the tricks
that have been played upon me. Please note that we have positive proofs! I can
hardly believe it myself, I assure you; I do not yet believe it; I am still
doubtful, because Gavrila Ardalionovitch has not had time to go into details;
but there can be no further doubt that Tchebaroff is a rogue! He has deceived
poor Mr. Burdovsky, and all of you, gentlemen, who have come forward so nobly
to support your friend—(he evidently needs support, I quite see that!).
He has abused your credulity and involved you all in an attempted fraud, for
when all is said and done this claim is nothing else!”
</p>

<p>
“What! a fraud? What, he is not Pavlicheff’s son?
Impossible!”
</p>

<p>
These exclamations but feebly expressed the profound bewilderment into which
the prince’s words had plunged Burdovsky’s companions.
</p>

<p>
“Certainly it is a fraud! Since Mr. Burdovsky is not Pavlicheff’s
son, his claim is neither more nor less than attempted fraud (supposing, of
course, that he had known the truth), but the fact is that he has been
deceived. I insist on this point in order to justify him; I repeat that his
simple-mindedness makes him worthy of pity, and that he cannot stand alone;
otherwise he would have behaved like a scoundrel in this matter. But I feel
certain that he does not understand it! I was just the same myself before I
went to Switzerland; I stammered incoherently; one tries to express oneself and
cannot. I understand that. I am all the better able to pity Mr. Burdovsky,
because I know from experience what it is to be like that, and so I have a
right to speak. Well, though there is no such person as
‘Pavlicheff’s son,’ and it is all nothing but a humbug, yet I
will keep to my decision, and I am prepared to give up ten thousand roubles in
memory of Pavlicheff. Before Mr. Burdovsky made this claim, I proposed to found
a school with this money, in memory of my benefactor, but I shall honour his
memory quite as well by giving the ten thousand roubles to Mr. Burdovsky,
because, though he was not Pavlicheff’s son, he was treated almost as
though he were. That is what gave a rogue the opportunity of deceiving him; he
really did think himself Pavlicheff’s son. Listen, gentlemen; this matter
must be settled; keep calm; do not get angry; and sit down! Gavrila
Ardalionovitch will explain everything to you at once, and I confess that I am
very anxious to hear all the details myself. He says that he has even been to
Pskoff to see your mother, Mr. Burdovsky; she is not dead, as the article which
was just read to us makes out. Sit down, gentlemen, sit down!”
</p>

<p>
The prince sat down, and at length prevailed upon Burdovsky’s company to
do likewise. During the last ten or twenty minutes, exasperated by continual
interruptions, he had raised his voice, and spoken with great vehemence. Now,
no doubt, he bitterly regretted several words and expressions which had escaped
him in his excitement. If he had not been driven beyond the limits of
endurance, he would not have ventured to express certain conjectures so openly.
He had no sooner sat down than his heart was torn by sharp remorse. Besides
insulting Burdovsky with the supposition, made in the presence of witnesses,
that he was suffering from the complaint for which he had himself been treated
in Switzerland, he reproached himself with the grossest indelicacy in having
offered him the ten thousand roubles before everyone. “I ought to have
waited till to-morrow and offered him the money when we were alone,”
thought Muishkin. “Now it is too late, the mischief is done! Yes, I am an
idiot, an absolute idiot!” he said to himself, overcome with shame and
regret.
</p>

<p>
Till then Gavrila Ardalionovitch had sat apart in silence. When the prince
called upon him, he came and stood by his side, and in a calm, clear voice
began to render an account of the mission confided to him. All conversation
ceased instantly. Everyone, especially the Burdovsky party, listened with the
utmost curiosity.
</p>

<h3>IX.</h3>

<p>
“You will not deny, I am sure,” said Gavrila Ardalionovitch,
turning to Burdovsky, who sat looking at him with wide-open eyes, perplexed and
astonished. “You will not deny, seriously, that you were born just two
years after your mother’s legal marriage to Mr. Burdovsky, your father.
Nothing would be easier than to prove the date of your birth from well-known
facts; we can only look on Mr. Keller’s version as a work of imagination,
and one, moreover, extremely offensive both to you and your mother. Of course
he distorted the truth in order to strengthen your claim, and to serve your
interests. Mr. Keller said that he previously consulted you about his article
in the paper, but did not read it to you as a whole. Certainly he could not
have read that passage...”
</p>

<p>
“As a matter of fact, I did not read it,” interrupted the boxer,
“but its contents had been given me on unimpeachable authority, and
I...”
</p>

<p>
“Excuse me, Mr. Keller,” interposed Gavrila Ardalionovitch.
“Allow me to speak. I assure you your article shall be mentioned in its
proper place, and you can then explain everything, but for the moment I would
rather not anticipate. Quite accidentally, with the help of my sister, Varvara
Ardalionovna Ptitsin, I obtained from one of her intimate friends, Madame
Zoubkoff, a letter written to her twenty-five years ago, by Nicolai Andreevitch
Pavlicheff, then abroad. After getting into communication with this lady, I
went by her advice to Timofei Fedorovitch Viazovkin, a retired colonel, and one
of Pavlicheff’s oldest friends. He gave me two more letters written by
the latter when he was still in foreign parts. These three documents, their
dates, and the facts mentioned in them, prove in the most undeniable manner,
that eighteen months before your birth, Nicolai Andreevitch went abroad, where
he remained for three consecutive years. Your mother, as you are well aware,
has never been out of Russia.... It is too late to read the letters now; I am
content to state the fact. But if you desire it, come to me tomorrow morning,
bring witnesses and writing experts with you, and I will prove the absolute
truth of my story. From that moment the question will be decided.”
</p>

<p>
These words caused a sensation among the listeners, and there was a general
movement of relief. Burdovsky got up abruptly.
</p>

<p>
“If that is true,” said he, “I have been deceived, grossly
deceived, but not by Tchebaroff: and for a long time past, a long time. I do
not wish for experts, not I, nor to go to see you. I believe you. I give it
up.... But I refuse the ten thousand roubles. Good-bye.”
</p>

<p>
“Wait five minutes more, Mr. Burdovsky,” said Gavrila
Ardalionovitch pleasantly. “I have more to say. Some rather curious and
important facts have come to light, and it is absolutely necessary, in my
opinion, that you should hear them. You will not regret, I fancy, to have the
whole matter thoroughly cleared up.”
</p>

<p>
Burdovsky silently resumed his seat, and bent his head as though in profound
thought. His friend, Lebedeff’s nephew, who had risen to accompany him,
also sat down again. He seemed much disappointed, though as self-confident as
ever. Hippolyte looked dejected and sulky, as well as surprised. He had just
been attacked by a violent fit of coughing, so that his handkerchief was
stained with blood. The boxer looked thoroughly frightened.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, Antip!” cried he in a miserable voice, “I did say to you
the other day—the day before yesterday—that perhaps you were not
really Pavlicheff’s son!”
</p>

<p>
There were sounds of half-smothered laughter at this.
</p>

<p>
“Now, that is a valuable piece of information, Mr. Keller,” replied
Gania. “However that may be, I have private information which convinces
me that Mr. Burdovsky, though doubtless aware of the date of his birth, knew
nothing at all about Pavlicheff’s sojourn abroad. Indeed, he passed the
greater part of his life out of Russia, returning at intervals for short
visits. The journey in question is in itself too unimportant for his friends to
recollect it after more than twenty years; and of course Mr. Burdovsky could
have known nothing about it, for he was not born. As the event has proved, it
was not impossible to find evidence of his absence, though I must confess that
chance has helped me in a quest which might very well have come to nothing. It
was really almost impossible for Burdovsky or Tchebaroff to discover these
facts, even if it had entered their heads to try. Naturally they never
dreamt...”
</p>

<p>
Here the voice of Hippolyte suddenly intervened.
</p>

<p>
“Allow me, Mr. Ivolgin,” he said irritably. “What is the good
of all this rigmarole? Pardon me. All is now clear, and we acknowledge the
truth of your main point. Why go into these tedious details? You wish perhaps
to boast of the cleverness of your investigation, to cry up your talents as
detective? Or perhaps your intention is to excuse Burdovsky, by proving that he
took up the matter in ignorance? Well, I consider that extremely impudent on
your part! You ought to know that Burdovsky has no need of being excused or
justified by you or anyone else! It is an insult! The affair is quite painful
enough for him without that. Will nothing make you understand?”
</p>

<p>
“Enough! enough! Mr. Terentieff,” interrupted Gania.
</p>

<p>
“Don’t excite yourself; you seem very ill, and I am sorry for that.
I am almost done, but there are a few facts to which I must briefly refer, as I
am convinced that they ought to be clearly explained once for all....” A
movement of impatience was noticed in his audience as he resumed: “I
merely wish to state, for the information of all concerned, that the reason for
Mr. Pavlicheff’s interest in your mother, Mr. Burdovsky, was simply that
she was the sister of a serf-girl with whom he was deeply in love in his youth,
and whom most certainly he would have married but for her sudden death. I have
proofs that this circumstance is almost, if not quite, forgotten. I may add
that when your mother was about ten years old, Pavlicheff took her under his
care, gave her a good education, and later, a considerable dowry. His relations
were alarmed, and feared he might go so far as to marry her, but she gave her
hand to a young land-surveyor named Burdovsky when she reached the age of
twenty. I can even say definitely that it was a marriage of affection. After
his wedding your father gave up his occupation as land-surveyor, and with his
wife’s dowry of fifteen thousand roubles went in for commercial
speculations. As he had had no experience, he was cheated on all sides, and
took to drink in order to forget his troubles. He shortened his life by his
excesses, and eight years after his marriage he died. Your mother says herself
that she was left in the direst poverty, and would have died of starvation had
it not been for Pavlicheff, who generously allowed her a yearly pension of six
hundred roubles. Many people recall his extreme fondness for you as a little
boy. Your mother confirms this, and agrees with others in thinking that he
loved you the more because you were a sickly child, stammering in your speech,
and almost deformed—for it is known that all his life Nicolai Andreevitch
had a partiality for unfortunates of every kind, especially children. In my
opinion this is most important. I may add that I discovered yet another fact,
the last on which I employed my detective powers. Seeing how fond Pavlicheff
was of you,—it was thanks to him you went to school, and also had the
advantage of special teachers—his relations and servants grew to believe
that you were his son, and that your father had been betrayed by his wife. I
may point out that this idea was only accredited generally during the last
years of Pavlicheff’s life, when his next-of-kin were trembling about the
succession, when the earlier story was quite forgotten, and when all
opportunity for discovering the truth had seemingly passed away. No doubt you,
Mr. Burdovsky, heard this conjecture, and did not hesitate to accept it as
true. I have had the honour of making your mother’s acquaintance, and I
find that she knows all about these reports. What she does not know is that
you, her son, should have listened to them so complaisantly. I found your
respected mother at Pskoff, ill and in deep poverty, as she has been ever since
the death of your benefactor. She told me with tears of gratitude how you had
supported her; she expects much of you, and believes fervently in your future
success...”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, this is unbearable!” said Lebedeff’s nephew impatiently.
“What is the good of all this romancing?”
</p>

<p>
“It is revolting and unseemly!” cried Hippolyte, jumping up in a
fury.
</p>

<p>
Burdovsky alone sat silent and motionless.
</p>

<p>
“What is the good of it?” repeated Gavrila Ardalionovitch, with
pretended surprise. “Well, firstly, because now perhaps Mr. Burdovsky is
quite convinced that Mr. Pavlicheff’s love for him came simply from
generosity of soul, and not from paternal duty. It was most necessary to
impress this fact upon his mind, considering that he approved of the article
written by Mr. Keller. I speak thus because I look on you, Mr. Burdovsky, as an
honourable man. Secondly, it appears that there was no intention of cheating in
this case, even on the part of Tchebaroff. I wish to say this quite plainly,
because the prince hinted a while ago that I too thought it an attempt at
robbery and extortion. On the contrary, everyone has been quite sincere in the
matter, and although Tchebaroff may be somewhat of a rogue, in this business he
has acted simply as any sharp lawyer would do under the circumstances. He
looked at it as a case that might bring him in a lot of money, and he did not
calculate badly; because on the one hand he speculated on the generosity of the
prince, and his gratitude to the late Mr. Pavlicheff, and on the other to his
chivalrous ideas as to the obligations of honour and conscience. As to Mr.
Burdovsky, allowing for his principles, we may acknowledge that he engaged in
the business with very little personal aim in view. At the instigation of
Tchebaroff and his other friends, he decided to make the attempt in the service
of truth, progress, and humanity. In short, the conclusion may be drawn that,
in spite of all appearances, Mr. Burdovsky is a man of irreproachable
character, and thus the prince can all the more readily offer him his
friendship, and the assistance of which he spoke just now...”
</p>

<p>
“Hush! hush! Gavrila Ardalionovitch!” cried Muishkin in dismay, but
it was too late.
</p>

<p>
“I said, and I have repeated it over and over again,” shouted
Burdovsky furiously, “that I did not want the money. I will not take
it... why...I will not... I am going away!”
</p>

<p>
He was rushing hurriedly from the terrace, when Lebedeff’s nephew seized
his arms, and said something to him in a low voice. Burdovsky turned quickly,
and drawing an addressed but unsealed envelope from his pocket, he threw it
down on a little table beside the prince.
</p>

<p>
“There’s the money!... How dare you?... The money!”
</p>

<p>
“Those are the two hundred and fifty roubles you dared to send him as a
charity, by the hands of Tchebaroff,” explained Doktorenko.
</p>

<p>
“The article in the newspaper put it at fifty!” cried Colia.
</p>

<p>
“I beg your pardon,” said the prince, going up to Burdovsky.
“I have done you a great wrong, but I did not send you that money as a
charity, believe me. And now I am again to blame. I offended you just
now.” (The prince was much distressed; he seemed worn out with fatigue,
and spoke almost incoherently.) “I spoke of swindling... but I did not
apply that to you. I was deceived .... I said you were... afflicted... like
me... But you are not like me... you give lessons... you support your mother. I
said you had dishonoured your mother, but you love her. She says so herself...
I did not know... Gavrila Ardalionovitch did not tell me that... Forgive me! I
dared to offer you ten thousand roubles, but I was wrong. I ought to have done
it differently, and now... there is no way of doing it, for you despise
me...”
</p>

<p>
“I declare, this is a lunatic asylum!” cried Lizabetha Prokofievna.
</p>

<p>
“Of course it is a lunatic asylum!” repeated Aglaya sharply, but
her words were overpowered by other voices. Everybody was talking loudly,
making remarks and comments; some discussed the affair gravely, others laughed.
Ivan Fedorovitch Epanchin was extremely indignant. He stood waiting for his
wife with an air of offended dignity. Lebedeff’s nephew took up the word
again.
</p>

<p>
“Well, prince, to do you justice, you certainly know how to make the most
of your—let us call it infirmity, for the sake of politeness; you have
set about offering your money and friendship in such a way that no
self-respecting man could possibly accept them. This is an excess of
ingenuousness or of malice—you ought to know better than anyone which
word best fits the case.”
</p>

<p>
“Allow me, gentlemen,” said Gavrila Ardalionovitch, who had just
examined the contents of the envelope, “there are only a hundred roubles
here, not two hundred and fifty. I point this out, prince, to prevent
misunderstanding.”
</p>

<p>
“Never mind, never mind,” said the prince, signing to him to keep
quiet.
</p>

<p>
“But we do mind,” said Lebedeff’s nephew vehemently.
“Prince, your ‘never mind’ is an insult to us. We have
nothing to hide; our actions can bear daylight. It is true that there are only
a hundred roubles instead of two hundred and fifty, but it is all the
same.”
</p>

<p>
“Why, no, it is hardly the same,” remarked Gavrila Ardalionovitch,
with an air of ingenuous surprise.
</p>

<p>
“Don’t interrupt, we are not such fools as you think, Mr.
Lawyer,” cried Lebedeff’s nephew angrily. “Of course there is
a difference between a hundred roubles and two hundred and fifty, but in this
case the principle is the main point, and that a hundred and fifty roubles are
missing is only a side issue. The point to be emphasized is that Burdovsky will
not accept your highness’s charity; he flings it back in your face, and
it scarcely matters if there are a hundred roubles or two hundred and fifty.
Burdovsky has refused ten thousand roubles; you heard him. He would not have
returned even a hundred roubles if he was dishonest! The hundred and fifty
roubles were paid to Tchebaroff for his travelling expenses. You may jeer at
our stupidity and at our inexperience in business matters; you have done all
you could already to make us look ridiculous; but do not dare to call us
dishonest. The four of us will club together every day to repay the hundred and
fifty roubles to the prince, if we have to pay it in instalments of a rouble at
a time, but we will repay it, with interest. Burdovsky is poor, he has no
millions. After his journey to see the prince Tchebaroff sent in his bill. We
counted on winning... Who would not have done the same in such a case?”
</p>

<p>
“Who indeed?” exclaimed Prince S.
</p>

<p>
“I shall certainly go mad, if I stay here!” cried Lizabetha
Prokofievna.
</p>

<p>
“It reminds me,” said Evgenie Pavlovitch, laughing, “of the
famous plea of a certain lawyer who lately defended a man for murdering six
people in order to rob them. He excused his client on the score of poverty.
‘It is quite natural,’ he said in conclusion, ‘considering
the state of misery he was in, that he should have thought of murdering these
six people; which of you, gentlemen, would not have done the same in his
place?’”
</p>

<p>
“Enough,” cried Lizabetha Prokofievna abruptly, trembling with
anger, “we have had enough of this balderdash!”
</p>

<p>
In a state of terrible excitement she threw back her head, with flaming eyes,
casting looks of contempt and defiance upon the whole company, in which she
could no longer distinguish friend from foe. She had restrained herself so long
that she felt forced to vent her rage on somebody. Those who knew Lizabetha
Prokofievna saw at once how it was with her. “She flies into these rages
sometimes,” said Ivan Fedorovitch to Prince S. the next day, “but
she is not often so violent as she was yesterday; it does not happen more than
once in three years.”
</p>

<p>
“Be quiet, Ivan Fedorovitch! Leave me alone!” cried Mrs. Epanchin.
“Why do you offer me your arm now? You had not sense enough to take me
away before. You are my husband, you are a father, it was your duty to drag me
away by force, if in my folly I refused to obey you and go quietly. You might
at least have thought of your daughters. We can find our way out now without
your help. Here is shame enough for a year! Wait a moment ‘till I thank
the prince! Thank you, prince, for the entertainment you have given us! It was
most amusing to hear these young men... It is vile, vile! A chaos, a scandal,
worse than a nightmare! Is it possible that there can be many such people on
earth? Be quiet, Aglaya! Be quiet, Alexandra! It is none of your business!
Don’t fuss round me like that, Evgenie Pavlovitch; you exasperate me! So,
my dear,” she cried, addressing the prince, “you go so far as to
beg their pardon! He says, ‘Forgive me for offering you a fortune.’
And you, you mountebank, what are you laughing at?” she cried, turning
suddenly on Lebedeff’s nephew. “‘We refuse ten thousand
roubles; we do not beseech, we demand!’ As if he did not know that this
idiot will call on them tomorrow to renew his offers of money and friendship.
You will, won’t you? You will? Come, will you, or won’t you?”
</p>

<p>
“I shall,” said the prince, with gentle humility.
</p>

<p>
“You hear him! You count upon it, too,” she continued, turning upon
Doktorenko. “You are as sure of him now as if you had the money in your
pocket. And there you are playing the swaggerer to throw dust in our eyes! No,
my dear sir, you may take other people in! I can see through all your airs and
graces, I see your game!”
</p>

<p>
“Lizabetha Prokofievna!” exclaimed the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Come, Lizabetha Prokofievna, it is quite time for us to be going, we
will take the prince with us,” said Prince S. with a smile, in the
coolest possible way.
</p>

<p>
The girls stood apart, almost frightened; their father was positively
horrified. Mrs. Epanchin’s language astonished everybody. Some who stood
a little way off smiled furtively, and talked in whispers. Lebedeff wore an
expression of utmost ecstasy.
</p>

<p>
“Chaos and scandal are to be found everywhere, madame,” remarked
Doktorenko, who was considerably put out of countenance.
</p>

<p>
“Not like this! Nothing like the spectacle you have just given us,
sir,” answered Lizabetha Prokofievna, with a sort of hysterical rage.
“Leave me alone, will you?” she cried violently to those around
her, who were trying to keep her quiet. “No, Evgenie Pavlovitch, if, as
you said yourself just now, a lawyer said in open court that he found it quite
natural that a man should murder six people because he was in misery, the world
must be coming to an end. I had not heard of it before. Now I understand
everything. And this stutterer, won’t he turn out a murderer?” she
cried, pointing to Burdovsky, who was staring at her with stupefaction.
“I bet he will! He will have none of your money, possibly, he will refuse
it because his conscience will not allow him to accept it, but he will go
murdering you by night and walking off with your cashbox, with a clear
conscience! He does not call it a dishonest action but ‘the impulse of a
noble despair’; ‘a negation’; or the devil knows what! Bah!
everything is upside down, everyone walks head downwards. A young girl, brought
up at home, suddenly jumps into a cab in the middle of the street, saying:
‘Good-bye, mother, I married Karlitch, or Ivanitch, the other day!’
And you think it quite right? You call such conduct estimable and natural? The
‘woman question’? Look here,” she continued, pointing to
Colia, “the other day that whippersnapper told me that this was the whole
meaning of the ‘woman question.’ But even supposing that your
mother is a fool, you are none the less, bound to treat her with humanity. Why
did you come here tonight so insolently? ‘Give us our rights, but
don’t dare to speak in our presence. Show us every mark of deepest
respect, while we treat you like the scum of the earth.’ The miscreants
have written a tissue of calumny in their article, and these are the men who
seek for truth, and do battle for the right! ‘We do not beseech, we
demand, you will get no thanks from us, because you will be acting to satisfy
your own conscience!’ What morality! But, good heavens! if you declare
that the prince’s generosity will, excite no gratitude in you, he might
answer that he is not, bound to be grateful to Pavlicheff, who also was only
satisfying his own conscience. But you counted on the prince’s, gratitude
towards Pavlicheff; you never lent him any money; he owes you nothing; then
what were you counting upon if not on his gratitude? And if you appeal to that
sentiment in others, why should you expect to be exempted from it? They are
mad! They say society is savage and inhuman because it despises a young girl
who has been seduced. But if you call society inhuman you imply that the young
girl is made to suffer by its censure. How then, can you hold her up to the
scorn of society in the newspapers without realizing that you are making her
suffering, still greater? Madmen! Vain fools! They don’t believe in God,
they don’t believe in Christ! But you are so eaten up by pride and
vanity, that you will end by devouring each other—that is my prophecy! Is
not this absurd? Is it not monstrous chaos? And after all this, that shameless
creature will go and beg their pardon! Are there many people like you? What are
you smiling at? Because I am not ashamed to disgrace myself before
you?—Yes, I am disgraced—it can’t be helped now! But
don’t you jeer at me, you scum!” (this was aimed at Hippolyte).
“He is almost at his last gasp, yet he corrupts others. You, have got
hold of this lad—” (she pointed to Colia); “you, have turned
his head, you have taught him to be an atheist, you don’t believe in God,
and you are not too old to be whipped, sir! A plague upon you! And so, Prince
Lef Nicolaievitch, you will call on them tomorrow, will you?” she asked
the prince breathlessly, for the second time.
</p>

<p>
“Yes.”
</p>

<p>
“Then I will never speak to you again.” She made a sudden movement
to go, and then turned quickly back. “And you will call on that
atheist?” she continued, pointing to Hippolyte. “How dare you grin
at me like that?” she shouted furiously, rushing at the invalid, whose
mocking smile drove her to distraction.
</p>

<p>
Exclamations arose on all sides.
</p>

<p>
“Lizabetha Prokofievna! Lizabetha Prokofievna! Lizabetha
Prokofievna!”
</p>

<p>
“Mother, this is disgraceful!” cried Aglaya.
</p>

<p>
Mrs. Epanchin had approached Hippolyte and seized him firmly by the arm, while
her eyes, blazing with fury, were fixed upon his face.
</p>

<p>
“Do not distress yourself, Aglaya Ivanovitch,” he answered calmly;
“your mother knows that one cannot strike a dying man. I am ready to
explain why I was laughing. I shall be delighted if you will let
me—”
</p>

<p>
A violent fit of coughing, which lasted a full minute, prevented him from
finishing his sentence.
</p>

<p>
“He is dying, yet he will not stop holding forth!” cried Lizabetha
Prokofievna. She loosed her hold on his arm, almost terrified, as she saw him
wiping the blood from his lips. “Why do you talk? You ought to go home to
bed.”
</p>

<p>
“So I will,” he whispered hoarsely. “As soon as I get home I
will go to bed at once; and I know I shall be dead in a fortnight; Botkine told
me so himself last week. That is why I should like to say a few farewell words,
if you will let me.”
</p>

<p>
“But you must be mad! It is ridiculous! You should take care of yourself;
what is the use of holding a conversation now? Go home to bed, do!” cried
Mrs. Epanchin in horror.
</p>

<p>
“When I do go to bed I shall never get up again,” said Hippolyte,
with a smile. “I meant to take to my bed yesterday and stay there till I
died, but as my legs can still carry me, I put it off for two days, so as to
come here with them to-day—but I am very tired.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, sit down, sit down, why are you standing?”
</p>

<p>
Lizabetha Prokofievna placed a chair for him with her own hands.
</p>

<p>
“Thank you,” he said gently. “Sit opposite to me, and let us
talk. We must have a talk now, Lizabetha Prokofievna; I am very anxious for
it.” He smiled at her once more. “Remember that today, for the last
time, I am out in the air, and in the company of my fellow-men, and that in a
fortnight I shall certainly be no longer in this world. So, in a way, this is
my farewell to nature and to men. I am not very sentimental, but do you know, I
am quite glad that all this has happened at Pavlofsk, where at least one can
see a green tree.”
</p>

<p>
“But why talk now?” replied Lizabetha Prokofievna, more and more
alarmed; “You are quite feverish. Just now you would not stop shouting,
and now you can hardly breathe. You are gasping.”
</p>

<p>
“I shall have time to rest. Why will you not grant my last wish? Do you
know, Lizabetha Prokofievna, that I have dreamed of meeting you for a long
while? I had often heard of you from Colia; he is almost the only person who
still comes to see me. You are an original and eccentric woman; I have seen
that for myself—Do you know, I have even been rather fond of you?”
</p>

<p>
“Good heavens! And I very nearly struck him!”
</p>

<p>
“You were prevented by Aglaya Ivanovna. I think I am not mistaken? That
is your daughter, Aglaya Ivanovna? She is so beautiful that I recognized her
directly, although I had never seen her before. Let me, at least, look on
beauty for the last time in my life,” he said with a wry smile.
“You are here with the prince, and your husband, and a large company. Why
should you refuse to gratify my last wish?”
</p>

<p>
“Give me a chair!” cried Lizabetha Prokofievna, but she seized one
for herself and sat down opposite to Hippolyte. “Colia, you must go home
with him,” she commanded, “and tomorrow I will come my self.”
</p>

<p>
“Will you let me ask the prince for a cup of tea?... I am exhausted. Do
you know what you might do, Lizabetha Prokofievna? I think you wanted to take
the prince home with you for tea. Stay here, and let us spend the evening
together. I am sure the prince will give us all some tea. Forgive me for being
so free and easy—but I know you are kind, and the prince is kind, too. In
fact, we are all good-natured people—it is really quite comical.”
</p>

<p>
The prince bestirred himself to give orders. Lebedeff hurried out, followed by
Vera.
</p>

<p>
“It is quite true,” said Mrs. Epanchin decisively. “Talk, but
not too loud, and don’t excite yourself. You have made me sorry for you.
Prince, you don’t deserve that I should stay and have tea with you, yet I
will, all the same, but I won’t apologize. I apologize to nobody! Nobody!
It is absurd! However, forgive me, prince, if I blew you up—that is, if
you like, of course. But please don’t let me keep anyone,” she
added suddenly to her husband and daughters, in a tone of resentment, as though
they had grievously offended her. “I can come home alone quite
well.”
</p>

<p>
But they did not let her finish, and gathered round her eagerly. The prince
immediately invited everyone to stay for tea, and apologized for not having
thought of it before. The general murmured a few polite words, and asked
Lizabetha Prokofievna if she did not feel cold on the terrace. He very nearly
asked Hippolyte how long he had been at the University, but stopped himself in
time. Evgenie Pavlovitch and Prince S. suddenly grew extremely gay and amiable.
Adelaida and Alexandra had not recovered from their surprise, but it was now
mingled with satisfaction; in short, everyone seemed very much relieved that
Lizabetha Prokofievna had got over her paroxysm. Aglaya alone still frowned,
and sat apart in silence. All the other guests stayed on as well; no one wanted
to go, not even General Ivolgin, but Lebedeff said something to him in passing
which did not seem to please him, for he immediately went and sulked in a
corner. The prince took care to offer tea to Burdovsky and his friends as well
as the rest. The invitation made them rather uncomfortable. They muttered that
they would wait for Hippolyte, and went and sat by themselves in a distant
corner of the verandah. Tea was served at once; Lebedeff had no doubt ordered
it for himself and his family before the others arrived. It was striking
eleven.
</p>

<h3>X.</h3>

<p>
After moistening his lips with the tea which Vera Lebedeff brought him,
Hippolyte set the cup down on the table, and glanced round. He seemed confused
and almost at a loss.
</p>

<p>
“Just look, Lizabetha Prokofievna,” he began, with a kind of
feverish haste; “these china cups are supposed to be extremely valuable.
Lebedeff always keeps them locked up in his china-cupboard; they were part of
his wife’s dowry. Yet he has brought them out tonight—in your
honour, of course! He is so pleased—” He was about to add something
else, but could not find the words.
</p>

<p>
“There, he is feeling embarrassed; I expected as much,” whispered
Evgenie Pavlovitch suddenly in the prince’s ear. “It is a bad sign;
what do you think? Now, out of spite, he will come out with something so
outrageous that even Lizabetha Prokofievna will not be able to stand it.”
</p>

<p>
Muishkin looked at him inquiringly.
</p>

<p>
“You do not care if he does?” added Evgenie Pavlovitch.
“Neither do I; in fact, I should be glad, merely as a proper punishment
for our dear Lizabetha Prokofievna. I am very anxious that she should get it,
without delay, and I shall stay till she does. You seem feverish.”
</p>

<p>
“Never mind; by-and-by; yes, I am not feeling well,” said the
prince impatiently, hardly listening. He had just heard Hippolyte mention his
own name.
</p>

<p>
“You don’t believe it?” said the invalid, with a nervous
laugh. “I don’t wonder, but the prince will have no difficulty in
believing it; he will not be at all surprised.”
</p>

<p>
“Do you hear, prince—do you hear that?” said Lizabetha
Prokofievna, turning towards him.
</p>

<p>
There was laughter in the group around her, and Lebedeff stood before her
gesticulating wildly.
</p>

<p>
“He declares that your humbug of a landlord revised this
gentleman’s article—the article that was read aloud just
now—in which you got such a charming dressing-down.”
</p>

<p>
The prince regarded Lebedeff with astonishment.
</p>

<p>
“Why don’t you say something?” cried Lizabetha Prokofievna,
stamping her foot.
</p>

<p>
“Well,” murmured the prince, with his eyes still fixed on Lebedeff,
“I can see now that he did.”
</p>

<p>
“Is it true?” she asked eagerly.
</p>

<p>
“Absolutely, your excellency,” said Lebedeff, without the least
hesitation.
</p>

<p>
Mrs. Epanchin almost sprang up in amazement at his answer, and at the assurance
of his tone.
</p>

<p>
“He actually seems to boast of it!” she cried.
</p>

<p>
“I am base—base!” muttered Lebedeff, beating his breast, and
hanging his head.
</p>

<p>
“What do I care if you are base or not? He thinks he has only to say,
‘I am base,’ and there is an end of it. As to you, prince, are you
not ashamed?—I repeat, are you not ashamed, to mix with such riff-raff? I
will never forgive you!”
</p>

<p>
“The prince will forgive me!” said Lebedeff with emotional
conviction.
</p>

<p>
Keller suddenly left his seat, and approached Lizabetha Prokofievna.
</p>

<p>
“It was only out of generosity, madame,” he said in a resonant
voice, “and because I would not betray a friend in an awkward position,
that I did not mention this revision before; though you heard him yourself
threatening to kick us down the steps. To clear the matter up, I declare now
that I did have recourse to his assistance, and that I paid him six roubles for
it. But I did not ask him to correct my style; I simply went to him for
information concerning the facts, of which I was ignorant to a great extent,
and which he was competent to give. The story of the gaiters, the appetite in
the Swiss professor’s house, the substitution of fifty roubles for two
hundred and fifty—all such details, in fact, were got from him. I paid
him six roubles for them; but he did not correct the style.”
</p>

<p>
“I must state that I only revised the first part of the article,”
interposed Lebedeff with feverish impatience, while laughter rose from all
around him; “but we fell out in the middle over one idea, so I never
corrected the second part. Therefore I cannot be held responsible for the
numerous grammatical blunders in it.”
</p>

<p>
“That is all he thinks of!” cried Lizabetha Prokofievna.
</p>

<p>
“May I ask when this article was revised?” said Evgenie Pavlovitch
to Keller.
</p>

<p>
“Yesterday morning,” he replied, “we had an interview which
we all gave our word of honour to keep secret.”
</p>

<p>
“The very time when he was cringing before you and making protestations
of devotion! Oh, the mean wretches! I will have nothing to do with your
Pushkin, and your daughter shall not set foot in my house!”
</p>

<p>
Lizabetha Prokofievna was about to rise, when she saw Hippolyte laughing, and
turned upon him with irritation.
</p>

<p>
“Well, sir, I suppose you wanted to make me look ridiculous?”
</p>

<p>
“Heaven forbid!” he answered, with a forced smile. “But I am
more than ever struck by your eccentricity, Lizabetha Prokofievna. I admit that
I told you of Lebedeff’s duplicity, on purpose. I knew the effect it
would have on you,—on you alone, for the prince will forgive him. He has
probably forgiven him already, and is racking his brains to find some excuse
for him—is not that the truth, prince?”
</p>

<p>
He gasped as he spoke, and his strange agitation seemed to increase.
</p>

<p>
“Well?” said Mrs. Epanchin angrily, surprised at his tone;
“well, what more?”
</p>

<p>
“I have heard many things of the kind about you...they delighted me... I
have learned to hold you in the highest esteem,” continued Hippolyte.
</p>

<p>
His words seemed tinged with a kind of sarcastic mockery, yet he was extremely
agitated, casting suspicious glances around him, growing confused, and
constantly losing the thread of his ideas. All this, together with his
consumptive appearance, and the frenzied expression of his blazing eyes,
naturally attracted the attention of everyone present.
</p>

<p>
“I might have been surprised (though I admit I know nothing of the
world), not only that you should have stayed on just now in the company of such
people as myself and my friends, who are not of your class, but that you should
let these... young ladies listen to such a scandalous affair, though no doubt
novel-reading has taught them all there is to know. I may be mistaken; I hardly
know what I am saying; but surely no one but you would have stayed to please a
whippersnapper (yes, a whippersnapper; I admit it) to spend the evening and
take part in everything—only to be ashamed of it tomorrow. (I know I
express myself badly.) I admire and appreciate it all extremely, though the
expression on the face of his excellency, your husband, shows that he thinks it
very improper. He-he!” He burst out laughing, and was seized with a fit
of coughing which lasted for two minutes and prevented him from speaking.
</p>

<p>
“He has lost his breath now!” said Lizabetha Prokofievna coldly,
looking at him with more curiosity than pity: “Come, my dear boy, that is
quite enough—let us make an end of this.”
</p>

<p>
Ivan Fedorovitch, now quite out of patience, interrupted suddenly. “Let
me remark in my turn, sir,” he said in tones of deep annoyance,
“that my wife is here as the guest of Prince Lef Nicolaievitch, our
friend and neighbour, and that in any case, young man, it is not for you to
pass judgment on the conduct of Lizabetha Prokofievna, or to make remarks aloud
in my presence concerning what feelings you think may be read in my face. Yes,
my wife stayed here,” continued the general, with increasing irritation,
“more out of amazement than anything else. Everyone can understand that a
collection of such strange young men would attract the attention of a person
interested in contemporary life. I stayed myself, just as I sometimes stop to
look on in the street when I see something that may be regarded
as-as-as-”
</p>

<p>
“As a curiosity,” suggested Evgenie Pavlovitch, seeing his
excellency involved in a comparison which he could not complete.
</p>

<p>
“That is exactly the word I wanted,” said the general with
satisfaction—“a curiosity. However, the most astonishing and, if I
may so express myself, the most painful, thing in this matter, is that you
cannot even understand, young man, that Lizabetha Prokofievna, only stayed with
you because you are ill,—if you really are dying—moved by the pity
awakened by your plaintive appeal, and that her name, character, and social
position place her above all risk of contamination. Lizabetha
Prokofievna!” he continued, now crimson with rage, “if you are
coming, we will say goodnight to the prince, and—”
</p>

<p>
“Thank you for the lesson, general,” said Hippolyte, with
unexpected gravity, regarding him thoughtfully.
</p>

<p>
“Two minutes more, if you please, dear Ivan Fedorovitch,” said
Lizabetha Prokofievna to her husband; “it seems to me that he is in a
fever and delirious; you can see by his eyes what a state he is in; it is
impossible to let him go back to Petersburg tonight. Can you put him up, Lef
Nicolaievitch? I hope you are not bored, dear prince,” she added suddenly
to Prince S. “Alexandra, my dear, come here! Your hair is coming
down.”
</p>

<p>
She arranged her daughter’s hair, which was not in the least disordered,
and gave her a kiss. This was all that she had called her for.
</p>

<p>
“I thought you were capable of development,” said Hippolyte, coming
out of his fit of abstraction. “Yes, that is what I meant to say,”
he added, with the satisfaction of one who suddenly remembers something he had
forgotten. “Here is Burdovsky, sincerely anxious to protect his mother;
is not that so? And he himself is the cause of her disgrace. The prince is
anxious to help Burdovsky and offers him friendship and a large sum of money,
in the sincerity of his heart. And here they stand like two sworn
enemies—ha, ha, ha! You all hate Burdovsky because his behaviour with
regard to his mother is shocking and repugnant to you; do you not? Is not that
true? Is it not true? You all have a passion for beauty and distinction in
outward forms; that is all you care for, isn’t it? I have suspected for a
long time that you cared for nothing else! Well, let me tell you that perhaps
there is not one of you who loved your mother as Burdovsky loved his. As to
you, prince, I know that you have sent money secretly to Burdovsky’s
mother through Gania. Well, I bet now,” he continued with an hysterical
laugh, “that Burdovsky will accuse you of indelicacy, and reproach you
with a want of respect for his mother! Yes, that is quite certain! Ha, ha,
ha!”
</p>

<p>
He caught his breath, and began to cough once more.
</p>

<p>
“Come, that is enough! That is all now; you have no more to say? Now go
to bed; you are burning with fever,” said Lizabetha Prokofievna
impatiently. Her anxious eyes had never left the invalid. “Good heavens,
he is going to begin again!”
</p>

<p>
“You are laughing, I think? Why do you keep laughing at me?” said
Hippolyte irritably to Evgenie Pavlovitch, who certainly was laughing.
</p>

<p>
“I only want to know, Mr. Hippolyte—excuse me, I forget your
surname.”
</p>

<p>
“Mr. Terentieff,” said the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Oh yes, Mr. Terentieff. Thank you prince. I heard it just now, but had
forgotten it. I want to know, Mr. Terentieff, if what I have heard about you is
true. It seems you are convinced that if you could speak to the people from a
window for a quarter of an hour, you could make them all adopt your views and
follow you?”
</p>

<p>
“I may have said so,” answered Hippolyte, as if trying to remember.
“Yes, I certainly said so,” he continued with sudden animation,
fixing an unflinching glance on his questioner. “What of it?”
</p>

<p>
“Nothing. I was only seeking further information, to put the finishing
touch.”
</p>

<p>
Evgenie Pavlovitch was silent, but Hippolyte kept his eyes fixed upon him,
waiting impatiently for more.
</p>

<p>
“Well, have you finished?” said Lizabetha Prokofievna to Evgenie.
“Make haste, sir; it is time he went to bed. Have you more to say?”
She was very angry.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I have a little more,” said Evgenie Pavlovitch, with a smile.
“It seems to me that all you and your friends have said, Mr. Terentieff,
and all you have just put forward with such undeniable talent, may be summed up
in the triumph of right above all, independent of everything else, to the
exclusion of everything else; perhaps even before having discovered what
constitutes the right. I may be mistaken?”
</p>

<p>
“You are certainly mistaken; I do not even understand you. What
else?”
</p>

<p>
Murmurs arose in the neighbourhood of Burdovsky and his companions;
Lebedeff’s nephew protested under his breath.
</p>

<p>
“I have nearly finished,” replied Evgenie Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
“I will only remark that from these premises one could conclude that
might is right—I mean the right of the clenched fist, and of personal
inclination. Indeed, the world has often come to that conclusion. Prudhon
upheld that might is right. In the American War some of the most advanced
Liberals took sides with the planters on the score that the blacks were an
inferior race to the whites, and that might was the right of the white
race.”
</p>

<p>
“Well?”
</p>

<p>
“You mean, no doubt, that you do not deny that might is right?”
</p>

<p>
“What then?”
</p>

<p>
“You are at least logical. I would only point out that from the right of
might, to the right of tigers and crocodiles, or even Daniloff and Gorsky, is
but a step.”
</p>

<p>
“I know nothing about that; what else?”
</p>

<p>
Hippolyte was scarcely listening. He kept saying “well?” and
“what else?” mechanically, without the least curiosity, and by mere
force of habit.
</p>

<p>
“Why, nothing else; that is all.”
</p>

<p>
“However, I bear you no grudge,” said Hippolyte suddenly, and,
hardly conscious of what he was doing, he held out his hand with a smile. The
gesture took Evgenie Pavlovitch by surprise, but with the utmost gravity he
touched the hand that was offered him in token of forgiveness.
</p>

<p>
“I can but thank you,” he said, in a tone too respectful to be
sincere, “for your kindness in letting me speak, for I have often noticed
that our Liberals never allow other people to have an opinion of their own, and
immediately answer their opponents with abuse, if they do not have recourse to
arguments of a still more unpleasant nature.”
</p>

<p>
“What you say is quite true,” observed General Epanchin; then,
clasping his hands behind his back, he returned to his place on the terrace
steps, where he yawned with an air of boredom.
</p>

<p>
“Come, sir, that will do; you weary me,” said Lizabetha Prokofievna
suddenly to Evgenie Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
Hippolyte rose all at once, looking troubled and almost frightened.
</p>

<p>
“It is time for me to go,” he said, glancing round in perplexity.
“I have detained you... I wanted to tell you everything... I thought you
all... for the last time... it was a whim...”
</p>

<p>
He evidently had sudden fits of returning animation, when he awoke from his
semi-delirium; then, recovering full self-possession for a few moments, he
would speak, in disconnected phrases which had perhaps haunted him for a long
while on his bed of suffering, during weary, sleepless nights.
</p>

<p>
“Well, good-bye,” he said abruptly. “You think it is easy for
me to say good-bye to you? Ha, ha!”
</p>

<p>
Feeling that his question was somewhat gauche, he smiled angrily. Then as if
vexed that he could not ever express what he really meant, he said irritably,
in a loud voice:
</p>

<p>
“Excellency, I have the honour of inviting you to my funeral; that is, if
you will deign to honour it with your presence. I invite you all, gentlemen, as
well as the general.”
</p>

<p>
He burst out laughing again, but it was the laughter of a madman. Lizabetha
Prokofievna approached him anxiously and seized his arm. He stared at her for a
moment, still laughing, but soon his face grew serious.
</p>

<p>
“Do you know that I came here to see those trees?” pointing to the
trees in the park. “It is not ridiculous, is it? Say that it is not
ridiculous!” he demanded urgently of Lizabetha Prokofievna. Then he
seemed to be plunged in thought. A moment later he raised his head, and his
eyes sought for someone. He was looking for Evgenie Pavlovitch, who was close
by on his right as before, but he had forgotten this, and his eyes ranged over
the assembled company. “Ah! you have not gone!” he said, when he
caught sight of him at last. “You kept on laughing just now, because I
thought of speaking to the people from the window for a quarter of an hour. But
I am not eighteen, you know; lying on that bed, and looking out of that window,
I have thought of all sorts of things for such a long time that... a dead man
has no age, you know. I was saying that to myself only last week, when I was
awake in the night. Do you know what you fear most? You fear our sincerity more
than anything, although you despise us! The idea crossed my mind that night...
You thought I was making fun of you just now, Lizabetha Prokofievna? No, the
idea of mockery was far from me; I only meant to praise you. Colia told me the
prince called you a child—very well—but let me see, I had something
else to say...” He covered his face with his hands and tried to collect
his thoughts.
</p>

<p>
“Ah, yes—you were going away just now, and I thought to myself:
‘I shall never see these people again—never again! This is the last
time I shall see the trees, too. I shall see nothing after this but the red
brick wall of Meyer’s house opposite my window. Tell them about
it—try to tell them,’ I thought. ‘Here is a beautiful young
girl—you are a dead man; make them understand that. Tell them that a dead
man may say anything—and Mrs. Grundy will not be angry—ha-ha! You
are not laughing?” He looked anxiously around. “But you know I get
so many queer ideas, lying there in bed. I have grown convinced that nature is
full of mockery—you called me an atheist just now, but you know this
nature... why are you laughing again? You are very cruel!” he added
suddenly, regarding them all with mournful reproach. “I have not
corrupted Colia,” he concluded in a different and very serious tone, as
if remembering something again.
</p>

<p>
“Nobody here is laughing at you. Calm yourself,” said Lizabetha
Prokofievna, much moved. “You shall see a new doctor tomorrow; the other
was mistaken; but sit down, do not stand like that! You are
delirious—” Oh, what shall we do with him she cried in anguish, as
she made him sit down again in the arm-chair.
</p>

<p>
A tear glistened on her cheek. At the sight of it Hippolyte seemed amazed. He
lifted his hand timidly and, touched the tear with his finger, smiling like a
child.
</p>

<p>
“I... you,” he began joyfully. “You cannot tell how I... he
always spoke so enthusiastically of you, Colia here; I liked his enthusiasm. I
was not corrupting him! But I must leave him, too—I wanted to leave them
all—there was not one of them—not one! I wanted to be a man of
action—I had a right to be. Oh! what a lot of things I wanted! Now I want
nothing; I renounce all my wants; I swore to myself that I would want nothing;
let them seek the truth without me! Yes, nature is full of mockery!
Why”—he continued with sudden warmth—“does she create
the choicest beings only to mock at them? The only human being who is
recognized as perfect, when nature showed him to mankind, was given the mission
to say things which have caused the shedding of so much blood that it would
have drowned mankind if it had all been shed at once! Oh! it is better for me
to die! I should tell some dreadful lie too; nature would so contrive it! I
have corrupted nobody. I wanted to live for the happiness of all men, to find
and spread the truth. I used to look out of my window at the wall of
Meyer’s house, and say to myself that if I could speak for a quarter of
an hour I would convince the whole world, and now for once in my life I have
come into contact with... you—if not with the others! And what is the
result? Nothing! The sole result is that you despise me! Therefore I must be a
fool, I am useless, it is time I disappeared! And I shall leave not even a
memory! Not a sound, not a trace, not a single deed! I have not spread a single
truth!... Do not laugh at the fool! Forget him! Forget him forever! I beseech
you, do not be so cruel as to remember! Do you know that if I were not
consumptive, I would kill myself?”
</p>

<p>
Though he seemed to wish to say much more, he became silent. He fell back into
his chair, and, covering his face with his hands, began to sob like a little
child.
</p>

<p>
“Oh! what on earth are we to do with him?” cried Lizabetha
Prokofievna. She hastened to him and pressed his head against her bosom, while
he sobbed convulsively.
</p>

<p>
“Come, come, come! There, you must not cry, that will do. You are a good
child! God will forgive you, because you knew no better. Come now, be a man!
You know presently you will be ashamed.”
</p>

<p>
Hippolyte raised his head with an effort, saying:
</p>

<p>
“I have little brothers and sisters, over there, poor avid innocent. She
will corrupt them! You are a saint! You are a child yourself—save them!
Snatch them from that... she is... it is shameful! Oh! help them! God will
repay you a hundredfold. For the love of God, for the love of Christ!”
</p>

<p>
“Speak, Ivan Fedorovitch! What are we to do?” cried Lizabetha
Prokofievna, irritably. “Please break your majestic silence! I tell you,
if you cannot come to some decision, I will stay here all night myself. You
have tyrannized over me enough, you autocrat!”
</p>

<p>
She spoke angrily, and in great excitement, and expected an immediate reply.
But in such a case, no matter how many are present, all prefer to keep silence:
no one will take the initiative, but all reserve their comments till
afterwards. There were some present—Varvara Ardalionovna, for
instance—who would have willingly sat there till morning without saying a
word. Varvara had sat apart all the evening without opening her lips, but she
listened to everything with the closest attention; perhaps she had her reasons
for so doing.
</p>

<p>
“My dear,” said the general, “it seems to me that a
sick-nurse would be of more use here than an excitable person like you. Perhaps
it would be as well to get some sober, reliable man for the night. In any case
we must consult the prince, and leave the patient to rest at once. Tomorrow we
can see what can be done for him.”
</p>

<p>
“It is nearly midnight; we are going. Will he come with us, or is he to
stay here?” Doktorenko asked crossly of the prince.
</p>

<p>
“You can stay with him if you like,” said Muishkin.
</p>

<p>
“There is plenty of room here.”
</p>

<p>
Suddenly, to the astonishment of all, Keller went quickly up to the general.
</p>

<p>
“Excellency,” he said, impulsively, “if you want a reliable
man for the night, I am ready to sacrifice myself for my friend—such a
soul as he has! I have long thought him a great man, excellency! My article
showed my lack of education, but when he criticizes he scatters pearls!”
</p>

<p>
Ivan Fedorovitch turned from the boxer with a gesture of despair.
</p>

<p>
“I shall be delighted if he will stay; it would certainly be difficult
for him to get back to Petersburg,” said the prince, in answer to the
eager questions of Lizabetha Prokofievna.
</p>

<p>
“But you are half asleep, are you not? If you don’t want him, I
will take him back to my house! Why, good gracious! He can hardly stand up
himself! What is it? Are you ill?”
</p>

<p>
Not finding the prince on his death-bed, Lizabetha Prokofievna had been misled
by his appearance to think him much better than he was. But his recent illness,
the painful memories attached to it, the fatigue of this evening, the incident
with “Pavlicheff’s son,” and now this scene with Hippolyte,
had all so worked on his oversensitive nature that he was now almost in a
fever. Moreover, a new trouble, almost a fear, showed itself in his eyes; he
watched Hippolyte anxiously as if expecting something further.
</p>

<p>
Suddenly Hippolyte arose. His face, shockingly pale, was that of a man
overwhelmed with shame and despair. This was shown chiefly in the look of fear
and hatred which he cast upon the assembled company, and in the wild smile upon
his trembling lips. Then he cast down his eyes, and with the same smile,
staggered towards Burdovsky and Doktorenko, who stood at the entrance to the
verandah. He had decided to go with them.
</p>

<p>
“There! that is what I feared!” cried the prince. “It was
inevitable!”
</p>

<p>
Hippolyte turned upon him, a prey to maniacal rage, which set all the muscles
of his face quivering.
</p>

<p>
“Ah! that is what you feared! It was inevitable, you say! Well, let me
tell you that if I hate anyone here—I hate you all,” he cried, in a
hoarse, strained voice—“but you, you, with your jesuitical soul,
your soul of sickly sweetness, idiot, beneficent millionaire—I hate you
worse than anything or anyone on earth! I saw through you and hated you long
ago; from the day I first heard of you. I hated you with my whole heart. You
have contrived all this! You have driven me into this state! You have made a
dying man disgrace himself. You, you, you are the cause of my abject cowardice!
I would kill you if I remained alive! I do not want your benefits; I will
accept none from anyone; do you hear? Not from any one! I want nothing! I was
delirious, do not dare to triumph! I curse every one of you, once for
all!”
</p>

<p>
Breath failed him here, and he was obliged to stop.
</p>

<p>
“He is ashamed of his tears!” whispered Lebedeff to Lizabetha
Prokofievna. “It was inevitable. Ah! what a wonderful man the prince is!
He read his very soul.”
</p>

<p>
But Mrs. Epanchin would not deign to look at Lebedeff. Drawn up haughtily, with
her head held high, she gazed at the “riff-raff,” with scornful
curiosity. When Hippolyte had finished, Ivan Fedorovitch shrugged his
shoulders, and his wife looked him angrily up and down, as if to demand the
meaning of his movement. Then she turned to the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Thanks, prince, many thanks, eccentric friend of the family, for the
pleasant evening you have provided for us. I am sure you are quite pleased that
you have managed to mix us up with your extraordinary affairs. It is quite
enough, dear family friend; thank you for giving us an opportunity of getting
to know you so well.”
</p>

<p>
She arranged her cloak with hands that trembled with anger as she waited for
the “riff-raff” to go. The cab which Lebedeff’s son had gone
to fetch a quarter of an hour ago, by Doktorenko’s order, arrived at that
moment. The general thought fit to put in a word after his wife.
</p>

<p>
“Really, prince, I hardly expected after—after all our friendly
intercourse—and you see, Lizabetha Prokofievna—”
</p>

<p>
“Papa, how can you?” cried Adelaida, walking quickly up to the
prince and holding out her hand.
</p>

<p>
He smiled absently at her; then suddenly he felt a burning sensation in his ear
as an angry voice whispered:
</p>

<p>
“If you do not turn those dreadful people out of the house this very
instant, I shall hate you all my life—all my life!” It was Aglaya.
She seemed almost in a frenzy, but she turned away before the prince could look
at her. However, there was no one left to turn out of the house, for they had
managed meanwhile to get Hippolyte into the cab, and it had driven off.
</p>

<p>
“Well, how much longer is this going to last, Ivan Fedorovitch? What do
you think? Shall I soon be delivered from these odious youths?”
</p>

<p>
“My dear, I am quite ready; naturally... the prince.”
</p>

<p>
Ivan Fedorovitch held out his hand to Muishkin, but ran after his wife, who was
leaving with every sign of violent indignation, before he had time to shake it.
Adelaida, her fiance, and Alexandra, said good-bye to their host with sincere
friendliness. Evgenie Pavlovitch did the same, and he alone seemed in good
spirits.
</p>

<p>
“What I expected has happened! But I am sorry, you poor fellow, that you
should have had to suffer for it,” he murmured, with a most charming
smile.
</p>

<p>
Aglaya left without saying good-bye. But the evening was not to end without a
last adventure. An unexpected meeting was yet in store for Lizabetha
Prokofievna.
</p>

<p>
She had scarcely descended the terrace steps leading to the high road that
skirts the park at Pavlofsk, when suddenly there dashed by a smart open
carriage, drawn by a pair of beautiful white horses. Having passed some ten
yards beyond the house, the carriage suddenly drew up, and one of the two
ladies seated in it turned sharp round as though she had just caught sight of
some acquaintance whom she particularly wished to see.
</p>

<p>
“Evgenie Pavlovitch! Is that you?” cried a clear, sweet voice,
which caused the prince, and perhaps someone else, to tremble. “Well, I
<i>am</i> glad I’ve found you at last! I’ve sent to town for you
twice today myself! My messengers have been searching for you
everywhere!”
</p>

<p>
Evgenie Pavlovitch stood on the steps like one struck by lightning. Mrs.
Epanchin stood still too, but not with the petrified expression of Evgenie. She
gazed haughtily at the audacious person who had addressed her companion, and
then turned a look of astonishment upon Evgenie himself.
</p>

<p>
“There’s news!” continued the clear voice. “You need
not be anxious about Kupferof’s IOU’s—Rogojin has bought them
up. I persuaded him to!—I dare say we shall settle Biscup too, so
it’s all right, you see! <i>Au revoir</i>, tomorrow! And don’t
worry!” The carriage moved on, and disappeared.
</p>

<p>
“The woman’s mad!” cried Evgenie, at last, crimson with
anger, and looking confusedly around. “I don’t know what
she’s talking about! What IOU’s? Who is she?” Mrs. Epanchin
continued to watch his face for a couple of seconds; then she marched briskly
and haughtily away towards her own house, the rest following her.
</p>

<p>
A minute afterwards, Evgenie Pavlovitch reappeared on the terrace, in great
agitation.
</p>

<p>
“Prince,” he said, “tell me the truth; do you know what all
this means?”
</p>

<p>
“I know nothing whatever about it!” replied the latter, who was,
himself, in a state of nervous excitement.
</p>

<p>
“No?”
</p>

<p>
“No!”
</p>

<p>
“Well, nor do I!” said Evgenie Pavlovitch, laughing suddenly.
“I haven’t the slightest knowledge of any such IOU’s as she
mentioned, I swear I haven’t—What’s the matter, are you
fainting?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, no—no—I’m all right, I assure you!”
</p>

<h3>XI.</h3>

<p>
The anger of the Epanchin family was unappeased for three days. As usual the
prince reproached himself, and had expected punishment, but he was inwardly
convinced that Lizabetha Prokofievna could not be seriously angry with him, and
that she probably was more angry with herself. He was painfully surprised,
therefore, when three days passed with no word from her. Other things also
troubled and perplexed him, and one of these grew more important in his eyes as
the days went by. He had begun to blame himself for two opposite
tendencies—on the one hand to extreme, almost “senseless,”
confidence in his fellows, on the other to a “vile, gloomy
suspiciousness.”
</p>

<p>
By the end of the third day the incident of the eccentric lady and Evgenie
Pavlovitch had attained enormous and mysterious proportions in his mind. He
sorrowfully asked himself whether he had been the cause of this new
“monstrosity,” or was it... but he refrained from saying who else
might be in fault. As for the letters N.P.B., he looked on that as a harmless
joke, a mere childish piece of mischief—so childish that he felt it would
be shameful, almost dishonourable, to attach any importance to it.
</p>

<p>
The day after these scandalous events, however, the prince had the honour of
receiving a visit from Adelaida and her fiance, Prince S. They came,
ostensibly, to inquire after his health. They had wandered out for a walk, and
called in “by accident,” and talked for almost the whole of the
time they were with him about a certain most lovely tree in the park, which
Adelaida had set her heart upon for a picture. This, and a little amiable
conversation on Prince S.’s part, occupied the time, and not a word was
said about last evening’s episodes. At length Adelaida burst out
laughing, apologized, and explained that they had come incognito; from which,
and from the circumstance that they said nothing about the prince’s
either walking back with them or coming to see them later on, the latter
inferred that he was in Mrs. Epanchin’s black books. Adelaida mentioned a
watercolour that she would much like to show him, and explained that she would
either send it by Colia, or bring it herself the next day—which to the
prince seemed very suggestive.
</p>

<p>
At length, however, just as the visitors were on the point of departing, Prince
S. seemed suddenly to recollect himself. “Oh yes, by-the-by,” he
said, “do you happen to know, my dear Lef Nicolaievitch, who that lady
was who called out to Evgenie Pavlovitch last night, from the carriage?”
</p>

<p>
“It was Nastasia Philipovna,” said the prince; “didn’t
you know that? I cannot tell you who her companion was.”
</p>

<p>
“But what on earth did she mean? I assure you it is a real riddle to
me—to me, and to others, too!” Prince S. seemed to be under the
influence of sincere astonishment.
</p>

<p>
“She spoke of some bills of Evgenie Pavlovitch’s,” said the
prince, simply, “which Rogojin had bought up from someone; and implied
that Rogojin would not press him.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, I heard that much, my dear fellow! But the thing is so impossibly
absurd! A man of property like Evgenie to give IOU’s to a money-lender,
and to be worried about them! It is ridiculous. Besides, he cannot possibly be
on such intimate terms with Nastasia Philipovna as she gave us to understand;
that’s the principal part of the mystery! He has given me his word that
he knows nothing whatever about the matter, and of course I believe him. Well,
the question is, my dear prince, do you know anything about it? Has any sort of
suspicion of the meaning of it come across you?”
</p>

<p>
“No, I know nothing whatever about it. I assure you I had nothing at all
to do with it.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, prince, how strange you have become! I assure you, I hardly know you
for your old self. How can you suppose that I ever suggested you could have had
a finger in such a business? But you are not quite yourself today, I can
see.” He embraced the prince, and kissed him.
</p>

<p>
“What do you mean, though,” asked Muishkin, “‘by such a
business’? I don’t see any particular ‘business’ about
it at all!”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, undoubtedly, this person wished somehow, and for some reason, to do
Evgenie Pavlovitch a bad turn, by attributing to him—before
witnesses—qualities which he neither has nor can have,” replied
Prince S. drily enough.
</p>

<p>
Muiskhin looked disturbed, but continued to gaze intently and questioningly
into Prince S.’s face. The latter, however, remained silent.
</p>

<p>
“Then it was not simply a matter of bills?” Muishkin said at last,
with some impatience. “It was not as she said?”
</p>

<p>
“But I ask you, my dear sir, how can there be anything in common between
Evgenie Pavlovitch, and—her, and again Rogojin? I tell you he is a man of
immense wealth—as I know for a fact; and he has further expectations from
his uncle. Simply Nastasia Philipovna—”
</p>

<p>
Prince S. paused, as though unwilling to continue talking about Nastasia
Philipovna.
</p>

<p>
“Then at all events he knows her!” remarked the prince, after a
moment’s silence.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, that may be. He may have known her some time ago—two or three
years, at least. He used to know Totski. But it is impossible that there should
be any intimacy between them. She has not even been in the place—many
people don’t even know that she has returned from Moscow! I have only
observed her carriage about for the last three days or so.”
</p>

<p>
“It’s a lovely carriage,” said Adelaida.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, it was a beautiful turn-out, certainly!”
</p>

<p>
The visitors left the house, however, on no less friendly terms than before.
But the visit was of the greatest importance to the prince, from his own point
of view. Admitting that he had his suspicions, from the moment of the
occurrence of last night, perhaps even before, that Nastasia had some
mysterious end in view, yet this visit confirmed his suspicions and justified
his fears. It was all clear to him; Prince S. was wrong, perhaps, in his view
of the matter, but he was somewhere near the truth, and was right in so far as
that he understood there to be an intrigue of some sort going on. Perhaps
Prince S. saw it all more clearly than he had allowed his hearers to
understand. At all events, nothing could be plainer than that he and Adelaida
had come for the express purpose of obtaining explanations, and that they
suspected him of being concerned in the affair. And if all this were so, then
<i>she</i> must have some terrible object in view! What was it? There was no
stopping <i>her</i>, as Muishkin knew from experience, in the performance of
anything she had set her mind on! “Oh, she is mad, mad!” thought
the poor prince.
</p>

<p>
But there were many other puzzling occurrences that day, which required
immediate explanation, and the prince felt very sad. A visit from Vera Lebedeff
distracted him a little. She brought the infant Lubotchka with her as usual,
and talked cheerfully for some time. Then came her younger sister, and later
the brother, who attended a school close by. He informed Muishkin that his
father had lately found a new interpretation of the star called
“wormwood,” which fell upon the water-springs, as described in the
Apocalypse. He had decided that it meant the network of railroads spread over
the face of Europe at the present time. The prince refused to believe that
Lebedeff could have given such an interpretation, and they decided to ask him
about it at the earliest opportunity. Vera related how Keller had taken up his
abode with them on the previous evening. She thought he would remain for some
time, as he was greatly pleased with the society of General Ivolgin and of the
whole family. But he declared that he had only come to them in order to
complete his education! The prince always enjoyed the company of
Lebedeff’s children, and today it was especially welcome, for Colia did
not appear all day. Early that morning he had started for Petersburg. Lebedeff
also was away on business. But Gavrila Ardalionovitch had promised to visit
Muishkin, who eagerly awaited his coming.
</p>

<p>
About seven in the evening, soon after dinner, he arrived. At the first glance
it struck the prince that he, at any rate, must know all the details of last
night’s affair. Indeed, it would have been impossible for him to remain
in ignorance considering the intimate relationship between him, Varvara
Ardalionovna, and Ptitsin. But although he and the prince were intimate, in a
sense, and although the latter had placed the Burdovsky affair in his
hands—and this was not the only mark of confidence he had
received—it seemed curious how many matters there were that were tacitly
avoided in their conversations. Muishkin thought that Gania at times appeared
to desire more cordiality and frankness. It was apparent now, when he entered,
that he was convinced that the moment for breaking the ice between them had
come at last.
</p>

<p>
But all the same Gania was in haste, for his sister was waiting at
Lebedeff’s to consult him on an urgent matter of business. If he had
anticipated impatient questions, or impulsive confidences, he was soon
undeceived. The prince was thoughtful, reserved, even a little absent-minded,
and asked none of the questions—one in particular—that Gania had
expected. So he imitated the prince’s demeanour, and talked fast and
brilliantly upon all subjects but the one on which their thoughts were engaged.
Among other things Gania told his host that Nastasia Philipovna had been only
four days in Pavlofsk, and that everyone was talking about her already. She was
staying with Daria Alexeyevna, in an ugly little house in Mattrossky Street,
but drove about in the smartest carriage in the place. A crowd of followers had
pursued her from the first, young and old. Some escorted her on horse-back when
she took the air in her carriage.
</p>

<p>
She was as capricious as ever in the choice of her acquaintances, and admitted
few into her narrow circle. Yet she already had a numerous following and many
champions on whom she could depend in time of need. One gentleman on his
holiday had broken off his engagement on her account, and an old general had
quarrelled with his only son for the same reason.
</p>

<p>
She was accompanied sometimes in her carriage by a girl of sixteen, a distant
relative of her hostess. This young lady sang very well; in fact, her music had
given a kind of notoriety to their little house. Nastasia, however, was
behaving with great discretion on the whole. She dressed quietly, though with
such taste as to drive all the ladies in Pavlofsk mad with envy, of that, as
well as of her beauty and her carriage and horses.
</p>

<p>
“As for yesterday’s episode,” continued Gania, “of
course it was pre-arranged.” Here he paused, as though expecting to be
asked how he knew that. But the prince did not inquire. Concerning Evgenie
Pavlovitch, Gania stated, without being asked, that he believed the former had
not known Nastasia Philipovna in past years, but that he had probably been
introduced to her by somebody in the park during these four days. As to the
question of the IOU’s she had spoken of, there might easily be something
in that; for though Evgenie was undoubtedly a man of wealth, yet certain of his
affairs were equally undoubtedly in disorder. Arrived at this interesting
point, Gania suddenly broke off, and said no more about Nastasia’s prank
of the previous evening.
</p>

<p>
At last Varvara Ardalionovna came in search of her brother, and remained for a
few minutes. Without Muishkin’s asking her, she informed him that Evgenie
Pavlovitch was spending the day in Petersburg, and perhaps would remain there
over tomorrow; and that her husband had also gone to town, probably in
connection with Evgenie Pavlovitch’s affairs.
</p>

<p>
“Lizabetha Prokofievna is in a really fiendish temper today,” she
added, as she went out, “but the most curious thing is that Aglaya has
quarrelled with her whole family; not only with her father and mother, but with
her sisters also. It is not a good sign.” She said all this quite
casually, though it was extremely important in the eyes of the prince, and went
off with her brother. Regarding the episode of “Pavlicheff’s
son,” Gania had been absolutely silent, partly from a kind of false
modesty, partly, perhaps, to “spare the prince’s feelings.”
The latter, however, thanked him again for the trouble he had taken in the
affair.
</p>

<p>
Muishkin was glad enough to be left alone. He went out of the garden, crossed
the road, and entered the park. He wished to reflect, and to make up his mind
as to a certain “step.” This step was one of those things, however,
which are not thought out, as a rule, but decided for or against hastily, and
without much reflection. The fact is, he felt a longing to leave all this and
go away—go anywhere, if only it were far enough, and at once, without
bidding farewell to anyone. He felt a presentiment that if he remained but a
few days more in this place, and among these people, he would be fixed there
irrevocably and permanently. However, in a very few minutes he decided that to
run away was impossible; that it would be cowardly; that great problems lay
before him, and that he had no right to leave them unsolved, or at least to
refuse to give all his energy and strength to the attempt to solve them. Having
come to this determination, he turned and went home, his walk having lasted
less than a quarter of an hour. At that moment he was thoroughly unhappy.
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff had not returned, so towards evening Keller managed to penetrate into
the prince’s apartments. He was not drunk, but in a confidential and
talkative mood. He announced that he had come to tell the story of his life to
Muishkin, and had only remained at Pavlofsk for that purpose. There was no
means of turning him out; nothing short of an earthquake would have removed
him.
</p>

<p>
In the manner of one with long hours before him, he began his history; but
after a few incoherent words he jumped to the conclusion, which was that
“having ceased to believe in God Almighty, he had lost every vestige of
morality, and had gone so far as to commit a theft.” “Could you
imagine such a thing?” said he.
</p>

<p>
“Listen to me, Keller,” returned the prince. “If I were in
your place, I should not acknowledge that unless it were absolutely necessary
for some reason. But perhaps you are making yourself out to be worse than you
are, purposely?”
</p>

<p>
“I should tell it to no one but yourself, prince, and I only name it now
as a help to my soul’s evolution. When I die, that secret will die with
me! But, excellency, if you knew, if you only had the least idea, how difficult
it is to get money nowadays! Where to find it is the question. Ask for a loan,
the answer is always the same: ‘Give us gold, jewels, or diamonds, and it
will be quite easy.’ Exactly what one has not got! Can you picture that
to yourself? I got angry at last, and said, ‘I suppose you would accept
emeralds?’ ‘Certainly, we accept emeralds with pleasure.
Yes!’ ‘Well, that’s all right,’ said I. ‘Go to
the devil, you den of thieves!’ And with that I seized my hat, and walked
out.”
</p>

<p>
“Had you any emeralds?” asked the prince.
</p>

<p>
“What? I have emeralds? Oh, prince! with what simplicity, with what
almost pastoral simplicity, you look upon life!”
</p>

<p>
Could not something be made of this man under good influences? asked the prince
of himself, for he began to feel a kind of pity for his visitor. He thought
little of the value of his own personal influence, not from a sense of
humility, but from his peculiar way of looking at things in general.
Imperceptibly the conversation grew more animated and more interesting, so that
neither of the two felt anxious to bring it to a close. Keller confessed, with
apparent sincerity, to having been guilty of many acts of such a nature that it
astonished the prince that he could mention them, even to him. At every fresh
avowal he professed the deepest repentance, and described himself as being
“bathed in tears”; but this did not prevent him from putting on a
boastful air at times, and some of his stories were so absurdly comical that
both he and the prince laughed like madmen.
</p>

<p>
“One point in your favour is that you seem to have a child-like mind, and
extreme truthfulness,” said the prince at last. “Do you know that
that atones for much?”
</p>

<p>
“I am assuredly noble-minded, and chivalrous to a degree!” said
Keller, much softened. “But, do you know, this nobility of mind exists in
a dream, if one may put it so? It never appears in practice or deed. Now, why
is that? I can never understand.”
</p>

<p>
“Do not despair. I think we may say without fear of deceiving ourselves,
that you have now given a fairly exact account of your life. I, at least, think
it would be impossible to add much to what you have just told me.”
</p>

<p>
“Impossible?” cried Keller, almost pityingly. “Oh prince, how
little you really seem to understand human nature!”
</p>

<p>
“Is there really much more to be added?” asked the prince, with
mild surprise. “Well, what is it you really want of me? Speak out; tell
me why you came to make your confession to me?”
</p>

<p>
“What did I want? Well, to begin with, it is good to meet a man like you.
It is a pleasure to talk over my faults with you. I know you for one of the
best of men... and then... then...”
</p>

<p>
He hesitated, and appeared so much embarrassed that the prince helped him out.
</p>

<p>
“Then you wanted me to lend you money?”
</p>

<p>
The words were spoken in a grave tone, and even somewhat shyly.
</p>

<p>
Keller started, gave an astonished look at the speaker, and thumped the table
with his fist.
</p>

<p>
“Well, prince, that’s enough to knock me down! It astounds me! Here
you are, as simple and innocent as a knight of the golden age, and yet...
yet... you read a man’s soul like a psychologist! Now, do explain it to
me, prince, because I... I really do not understand!... Of course, my aim was
to borrow money all along, and you... you asked the question as if there was
nothing blameable in it—as if you thought it quite natural.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes... from you it is quite natural.”
</p>

<p>
“And you are not offended?”
</p>

<p>
“Why should I be offended?”
</p>

<p>
“Well, just listen, prince. I remained here last evening, partly because
I have a great admiration for the French archbishop Bourdaloue. I enjoyed a
discussion over him till three o’clock in the morning, with Lebedeff; and
then... then—I swear by all I hold sacred that I am telling you the
truth—then I wished to develop my soul in this frank and heartfelt
confession to you. This was my thought as I was sobbing myself to sleep at
dawn. Just as I was losing consciousness, tears in my soul, tears on my face (I
remember how I lay there sobbing), an idea from hell struck me. ‘Why not,
after confessing, borrow money from him?’ You see, this confession was a
kind of masterstroke; I intended to use it as a means to your good grace and
favour—and then—then I meant to walk off with a hundred and fifty
roubles. Now, do you not call that base?”
</p>

<p>
“It is hardly an exact statement of the case,” said the prince in
reply. “You have confused your motives and ideas, as I need scarcely say
too often happens to myself. I can assure you, Keller, I reproach myself
bitterly for it sometimes. When you were talking just now I seemed to be
listening to something about myself. At times I have imagined that all men were
the same,” he continued earnestly, for he appeared to be much interested
in the conversation, “and that consoled me in a certain degree, for a
<i>double</i> motive is a thing most difficult to fight against. I have tried,
and I know. God knows whence they arise, these ideas that you speak of as base.
I fear these double motives more than ever just now, but I am not your judge,
and in my opinion it is going too far to give the name of baseness to
it—what do you think? You were going to employ your tears as a ruse in
order to borrow money, but you also say—in fact, you have sworn to the
fact—that independently of this your confession was made with an
honourable motive. As for the money, you want it for drink, do you not? After
your confession, that is weakness, of course; but, after all, how can anyone
give up a bad habit at a moment’s notice? It is impossible. What can we
do? It is best, I think, to leave the matter to your own conscience. How does
it seem to you?” As he concluded the prince looked curiously at Keller;
evidently this problem of double motives had often been considered by him
before.
</p>

<p>
“Well, how anybody can call you an idiot after that, is more than I can
understand!” cried the boxer.
</p>

<p>
The prince reddened slightly.
</p>

<p>
“Bourdaloue, the archbishop, would not have spared a man like me,”
Keller continued, “but you, you have judged me with humanity. To show how
grateful I am, and as a punishment, I will not accept a hundred and fifty
roubles. Give me twenty-five—that will be enough; it is all I really
need, for a fortnight at least. I will not ask you for more for a fortnight. I
should like to have given Agatha a present, but she does not really deserve it.
Oh, my dear prince, God bless you!”
</p>

<p>
At this moment Lebedeff appeared, having just arrived from Petersburg. He
frowned when he saw the twenty-five rouble note in Keller’s hand, but the
latter, having got the money, went away at once. Lebedeff began to abuse him.
</p>

<p>
“You are unjust; I found him sincerely repentant,” observed the
prince, after listening for a time.
</p>

<p>
“What is the good of repentance like that? It is the same exactly as mine
yesterday, when I said, ‘I am base, I am base,’—words, and
nothing more!”
</p>

<p>
“Then they were only words on your part? I thought, on the
contrary...”
</p>

<p>
“Well, I don’t mind telling you the truth—you only! Because
you see through a man somehow. Words and actions, truth and falsehood, are all
jumbled up together in me, and yet I am perfectly sincere. I feel the deepest
repentance, believe it or not, as you choose; but words and lies come out in
the infernal craving to get the better of other people. It is always
there—the notion of cheating people, and of using my repentant tears to
my own advantage! I assure you this is the truth, prince! I would not tell any
other man for the world! He would laugh and jeer at me—but you, you judge
a man humanely.”
</p>

<p>
“Why, Keller said the same thing to me nearly word for word a few minutes
ago!” cried Muishkin. “And you both seem inclined to boast about
it! You astonish me, but I think he is more sincere than you, for you make a
regular trade of it. Oh, don’t put on that pathetic expression, and
don’t put your hand on your heart! Have you anything to say to me? You
have not come for nothing...”
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff grinned and wriggled.
</p>

<p>
“I have been waiting all day for you, because I want to ask you a
question; and, for once in your life, please tell me the truth at once. Had you
anything to do with that affair of the carriage yesterday?”
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff began to grin again, rubbed his hands, sneezed, but spoke not a word
in reply.
</p>

<p>
“I see you had something to do with it.”
</p>

<p>
“Indirectly, quite indirectly! I am speaking the truth—I am indeed!
I merely told a certain person that I had people in my house, and that such and
such personages might be found among them.”
</p>

<p>
“I am aware that you sent your son to that house—he told me so
himself just now, but what is this intrigue?” said the prince,
impatiently.
</p>

<p>
“It is not my intrigue!” cried Lebedeff, waving his hand.
</p>

<p>
“It was engineered by other people, and is, properly speaking, rather a
fantasy than an intrigue!”
</p>

<p>
“But what is it all about? Tell me, for Heaven’s sake! Cannot you
understand how nearly it touches me? Why are they blackening Evgenie
Pavlovitch’s reputation?”
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff grimaced and wriggled again.
</p>

<p>
“Prince!” said he. “Excellency! You won’t let me tell
you the whole truth; I have tried to explain; more than once I have begun, but
you have not allowed me to go on...”
</p>

<p>
The prince gave no answer, and sat deep in thought. Evidently he was struggling
to decide.
</p>

<p>
“Very well! Tell me the truth,” he said, dejectedly.
</p>

<p>
“Aglaya Ivanovna...” began Lebedeff, promptly.
</p>

<p>
“Be silent! At once!” interrupted the prince, red with indignation,
and perhaps with shame, too. “It is impossible and absurd! All that has
been invented by you, or fools like you! Let me never hear you say a word again
on that subject!”
</p>

<p>
Late in the evening Colia came in with a whole budget of Petersburg and
Pavlofsk news. He did not dwell much on the Petersburg part of it, which
consisted chiefly of intelligence about his friend Hippolyte, but passed
quickly to the Pavlofsk tidings. He had gone straight to the Epanchins’
from the station.
</p>

<p>
“There’s the deuce and all going on there!” he said.
“First of all about the row last night, and I think there must be
something new as well, though I didn’t like to ask. Not a word about
<i>you</i>, prince, the whole time! The most interesting fact was that Aglaya
had been quarrelling with her people about Gania. Colia did not know any
details, except that it had been a terrible quarrel! Also Evgenie Pavlovitch
had called, and met with an excellent reception all round. And another curious
thing: Mrs. Epanchin was so angry that she called Varia to her—Varia was
talking to the girls—and turned her out of the house ‘once for
all’ she said. I heard it from Varia herself—Mrs. Epanchin was
quite polite, but firm; and when Varia said good-bye to the girls, she told
them nothing about it, and they didn’t know they were saying goodbye for
the last time. I’m sorry for Varia, and for Gania too; he isn’t
half a bad fellow, in spite of his faults, and I shall never forgive myself for
not liking him before! I don’t know whether I ought to continue to go to
the Epanchins’ now,” concluded Colia—“I like to be
quite independent of others, and of other people’s quarrels if I can; but
I must think over it.”
</p>

<p>
“I don’t think you need break your heart over Gania,” said
the prince; “for if what you say is true, he must be considered dangerous
in the Epanchin household, and if so, certain hopes of his must have been
encouraged.”
</p>

<p>
“What? What hopes?” cried Colia; “you surely don’t mean
Aglaya?—oh, no!—”
</p>

<p>
“You’re a dreadful sceptic, prince,” he continued, after a
moment’s silence. “I have observed of late that you have grown
sceptical about everything. You don’t seem to believe in people as you
did, and are always attributing motives and so on—am I using the word
‘sceptic’ in its proper sense?”
</p>

<p>
“I believe so; but I’m not sure.”
</p>

<p>
“Well, I’ll change it, right or wrong; I’ll say that you are
not sceptical, but <i>jealous</i>. There! you are deadly jealous of Gania, over
a certain proud damsel! Come!” Colia jumped up, with these words, and
burst out laughing. He laughed as he had perhaps never laughed before, and
still more when he saw the prince flushing up to his temples. He was delighted
that the prince should be jealous about Aglaya. However, he stopped immediately
on seeing that the other was really hurt, and the conversation continued, very
earnestly, for an hour or more.
</p>

<p>
Next day the prince had to go to town, on business. Returning in the afternoon,
he happened upon General Epanchin at the station. The latter seized his hand,
glancing around nervously, as if he were afraid of being caught in wrong-doing,
and dragged him into a first-class compartment. He was burning to speak about
something of importance.
</p>

<p>
“In the first place, my dear prince, don’t be angry with me. I
would have come to see you yesterday, but I didn’t know how Lizabetha
Prokofievna would take it. My dear fellow, my house is simply a hell just now,
a sort of sphinx has taken up its abode there. We live in an atmosphere of
riddles; I can’t make head or tail of anything. As for you, I feel sure
you are the least to blame of any of us, though you certainly have been the
cause of a good deal of trouble. You see, it’s all very pleasant to be a
philanthropist; but it can be carried too far. Of course I admire
kind-heartedness, and I esteem my wife, but—”
</p>

<p>
The general wandered on in this disconnected way for a long time; it was clear
that he was much disturbed by some circumstance which he could make nothing of.
</p>

<p>
“It is plain to me, that <i>you</i> are not in it at all,” he
continued, at last, a little less vaguely, “but perhaps you had better
not come to our house for a little while. I ask you in the friendliest manner,
mind; just till the wind changes again. As for Evgenie Pavlovitch,” he
continued with some excitement, “the whole thing is a calumny, a dirty
calumny. It is simply a plot, an intrigue, to upset our plans and to stir up a
quarrel. You see, prince, I’ll tell you privately, Evgenie and ourselves
have not said a word yet, we have no formal understanding, we are in no way
bound on either side, but the word may be said very soon, don’t you see,
<i>very</i> soon, and all this is most injurious, and is meant to be so. Why?
I’m sure I can’t tell you. She’s an extraordinary woman, you
see, an eccentric woman; I tell you I am so frightened of that woman that I
can’t sleep. What a carriage that was, and where did it come from, eh? I
declare, I was base enough to suspect Evgenie at first; but it seems certain
that that cannot be the case, and if so, why is she interfering here?
That’s the riddle, what does she want? Is it to keep Evgenie to herself?
But, my dear fellow, I swear to you, I swear he doesn’t even <i>know</i>
her, and as for those bills, why, the whole thing is an invention! And the
familiarity of the woman! It’s quite clear we must treat the impudent
creature’s attempt with disdain, and redouble our courtesy towards
Evgenie. I told my wife so.
</p>

<p>
“Now I’ll tell you my secret conviction. I’m certain that
she’s doing this to revenge herself on me, on account of the past, though
I assure you that all the time I was blameless. I blush at the very idea. And
now she turns up again like this, when I thought she had finally disappeared!
Where’s Rogojin all this time? I thought she was Mrs. Rogojin, long
ago.”
</p>

<p>
The old man was in a state of great mental perturbation. The whole of the
journey, which occupied nearly an hour, he continued in this strain, putting
questions and answering them himself, shrugging his shoulders, pressing the
prince’s hand, and assuring the latter that, at all events, he had no
suspicion whatever of <i>him</i>. This last assurance was satisfactory, at all
events. The general finished by informing him that Evgenie’s uncle was
head of one of the civil service departments, and rich, very rich, and a
gourmand. “And, well, Heaven preserve him, of course—but Evgenie
gets his money, don’t you see? But, for all this, I’m
uncomfortable, I don’t know why. There’s something in the air, I
feel there’s something nasty in the air, like a bat, and I’m by no
means comfortable.”
</p>

<p>
And it was not until the third day that the formal reconciliation between the
prince and the Epanchins took place, as said before.
</p>

<h3>XII.</h3>

<p>
It was seven in the evening, and the prince was just preparing to go out for a
walk in the park, when suddenly Mrs. Epanchin appeared on the terrace.
</p>

<p>
“In the first place, don’t dare to suppose,” she began,
“that I am going to apologize. Nonsense! You were entirely to
blame.”
</p>

<p>
The prince remained silent.
</p>

<p>
“Were you to blame, or not?”
</p>

<p>
“No, certainly not, no more than yourself, though at first I thought I
was.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, very well, let’s sit down, at all events, for I don’t
intend to stand up all day. And remember, if you say, one word about
‘mischievous urchins,’ I shall go away and break with you
altogether. Now then, did you, or did you not, send a letter to Aglaya, a
couple of months or so ago, about Easter-tide?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes!”
</p>

<p>
“What for? What was your object? Show me the letter.” Mrs.
Epanchin’s eyes flashed; she was almost trembling with impatience.
</p>

<p>
“I have not got the letter,” said the prince, timidly, extremely
surprised at the turn the conversation had taken. “If anyone has it, if
it still exists, Aglaya Ivanovna must have it.”
</p>

<p>
“No finessing, please. What did you write about?”
</p>

<p>
“I am not finessing, and I am not in the least afraid of telling you; but
I don’t see the slightest reason why I should not have written.”
</p>

<p>
“Be quiet, you can talk afterwards! What was the letter about? Why are
you blushing?”
</p>

<p>
The prince was silent. At last he spoke.
</p>

<p>
“I don’t understand your thoughts, Lizabetha Prokofievna; but I can
see that the fact of my having written is for some reason repugnant to you. You
must admit that I have a perfect right to refuse to answer your questions; but,
in order to show you that I am neither ashamed of the letter, nor sorry that I
wrote it, and that I am not in the least inclined to blush about it”
(here the prince’s blushes redoubled), “I will repeat the substance
of my letter, for I think I know it almost by heart.”
</p>

<p>
So saying, the prince repeated the letter almost word for word, as he had
written it.
</p>

<p>
“My goodness, what utter twaddle, and what may all this nonsense have
signified, pray? If it had any meaning at all!” said Mrs. Epanchin,
cuttingly, after having listened with great attention.
</p>

<p>
“I really don’t absolutely know myself; I know my feeling was very
sincere. I had moments at that time full of life and hope.”
</p>

<p>
“What sort of hope?”
</p>

<p>
“It is difficult to explain, but certainly not the hopes you have in your
mind. Hopes—well, in a word, hopes for the future, and a feeling of joy
that <i>there</i>, at all events, I was not entirely a stranger and a
foreigner. I felt an ecstasy in being in my native land once more; and one
sunny morning I took up a pen and wrote her that letter, but why to <i>her</i>,
I don’t quite know. Sometimes one longs to have a friend near, and I
evidently felt the need of one then,” added the prince, and paused.
</p>

<p>
“Are you in love with her?”
</p>

<p>
“N-no! I wrote to her as to a sister; I signed myself her brother.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh yes, of course, on purpose! I quite understand.”
</p>

<p>
“It is very painful to me to answer these questions, Lizabetha
Prokofievna.”
</p>

<p>
“I dare say it is; but that’s no affair of mine. Now then, assure
me truly as before Heaven, are you lying to me or not?”
</p>

<p>
“No, I am not lying.”
</p>

<p>
“Are you telling the truth when you say you are not in love?”
</p>

<p>
“I believe it is the absolute truth.”
</p>

<p>
“‘I believe,’ indeed! Did that mischievous urchin give it to
her?”
</p>

<p>
“I asked Nicolai Ardalionovitch...”
</p>

<p>
“The urchin! the urchin!” interrupted Lizabetha Prokofievna in an
angry voice. “I do not want to know if it were Nicolai Ardalionovitch!
The urchin!”
</p>

<p>
“Nicolai Ardalionovitch...”
</p>

<p>
“The urchin, I tell you!”
</p>

<p>
“No, it was not the urchin: it was Nicolai Ardalionovitch,” said
the prince very firmly, but without raising his voice.
</p>

<p>
“Well, all right! All right, my dear! I shall put that down to your
account.”
</p>

<p>
She was silent a moment to get breath, and to recover her composure.
</p>

<p>
“Well!—and what’s the meaning of the ‘poor
knight,’ eh?”
</p>

<p>
“I don’t know in the least; I wasn’t present when the joke
was made. It <i>is</i> a joke. I suppose, and that’s all.”
</p>

<p>
“Well, that’s a comfort, at all events. You don’t suppose she
could take any interest in you, do you? Why, she called you an
‘idiot’ herself.”
</p>

<p>
“I think you might have spared me that,” murmured the prince
reproachfully, almost in a whisper.
</p>

<p>
“Don’t be angry; she is a wilful, mad, spoilt girl. If she likes a
person she will pitch into him, and chaff him. I used to be just such another.
But for all that you needn’t flatter yourself, my boy; she is not for
you. I don’t believe it, and it is not to be. I tell you so at once, so
that you may take proper precautions. Now, I want to hear you swear that you
are not married to that woman?”
</p>

<p>
“Lizabetha Prokofievna, what are you thinking of?” cried the
prince, almost leaping to his feet in amazement.
</p>

<p>
“Why? You very nearly were, anyhow.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes—I nearly was,” whispered the prince, hanging his head.
</p>

<p>
“Well then, have you come here for <i>her?</i> Are you in love with
<i>her?</i> With <i>that</i> creature?”
</p>

<p>
“I did not come to marry at all,” replied the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Is there anything you hold sacred?”
</p>

<p>
“There is.”
</p>

<p>
“Then swear by it that you did not come here to marry <i>her!</i>”
</p>

<p>
“I’ll swear it by whatever you please.”
</p>

<p>
“I believe you. You may kiss me; I breathe freely at last. But you must
know, my dear friend, Aglaya does not love you, and she shall never be your
wife while I am out of my grave. So be warned in time. Do you hear me?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I hear.”
</p>

<p>
The prince flushed up so much that he could not look her in the face.
</p>

<p>
“I have waited for you with the greatest impatience (not that you were
worth it). Every night I have drenched my pillow with tears, not for you, my
friend, not for you, don’t flatter yourself! I have my own grief, always
the same, always the same. But I’ll tell you why I have been awaiting you
so impatiently, because I believe that Providence itself sent you to be a
friend and a brother to me. I haven’t a friend in the world except
Princess Bielokonski, and she is growing as stupid as a sheep from old age. Now
then, tell me, yes or no? Do you know why she called out from her carriage the
other night?”
</p>

<p>
“I give you my word of honour that I had nothing to do with the matter
and know nothing about it.”
</p>

<p>
“Very well, I believe you. I have my own ideas about it. Up to yesterday
morning I thought it was really Evgenie Pavlovitch who was to blame; now I
cannot help agreeing with the others. But why he was made such a fool of I
cannot understand. However, he is not going to marry Aglaya, I can tell you
that. He may be a very excellent fellow, but—so it shall be. I was not at
all sure of accepting him before, but now I have quite made up my mind that I
won’t have him. ‘Put me in my coffin first and then into my grave,
and then you may marry my daughter to whomsoever you please,’ so I said
to the general this very morning. You see how I trust you, my boy.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I see and understand.”
</p>

<p>
Mrs. Epanchin gazed keenly into the prince’s eyes. She was anxious to see
what impression the news as to Evgenie Pavlovitch had made upon him.
</p>

<p>
“Do you know anything about Gavrila Ardalionovitch?” she asked at
last.
</p>

<p>
“Oh yes, I know a good deal.”
</p>

<p>
“Did you know he had communications with Aglaya?”
</p>

<p>
“No, I didn’t,” said the prince, trembling a little, and in
great agitation. “You say Gavrila Ardalionovitch has private
communications with Aglaya?—Impossible!”
</p>

<p>
“Only quite lately. His sister has been working like a rat to clear the
way for him all the winter.”
</p>

<p>
“I don’t believe it!” said the prince abruptly, after a short
pause. “Had it been so I should have known long ago.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, of course, yes; he would have come and wept out his secret on your
bosom. Oh, you simpleton—you simpleton! Anyone can deceive you and take
you in like a—like a,—aren’t you ashamed to trust him?
Can’t you see that he humbugs you just as much as ever he pleases?”
</p>

<p>
“I know very well that he does deceive me occasionally, and he knows that
I know it, but—” The prince did not finish his sentence.
</p>

<p>
“And that’s why you trust him, eh? So I should have supposed. Good
Lord, was there ever such a man as you? Tfu! and are you aware, sir, that this
Gania, or his sister Varia, have brought her into correspondence with Nastasia
Philipovna?”
</p>

<p>
“Brought whom?” cried Muishkin.
</p>

<p>
“Aglaya.”
</p>

<p>
“I don’t believe it! It’s impossible! What object could they
have?” He jumped up from his chair in his excitement.
</p>

<p>
“Nor do I believe it, in spite of the proofs. The girl is self-willed and
fantastic, and insane! She’s wicked, wicked! I’ll repeat it for a
thousand years that she’s wicked; they <i>all</i> are, just now, all my
daughters, even that ‘wet hen’ Alexandra. And yet I don’t
believe it. Because I don’t choose to believe it, perhaps; but I
don’t. Why haven’t you been?” she turned on the prince
suddenly. “Why didn’t you come near us all these three days,
eh?”
</p>

<p>
The prince began to give his reasons, but she interrupted him again.
</p>

<p>
“Everybody takes you in and deceives you; you went to town yesterday. I
dare swear you went down on your knees to that rogue, and begged him to accept
your ten thousand roubles!”
</p>

<p>
“I never thought of doing any such thing. I have not seen him, and he is
not a rogue, in my opinion. I have had a letter from him.”
</p>

<p>
“Show it me!”
</p>

<p>
The prince took a paper from his pocket-book, and handed it to Lizabetha
Prokofievna. It ran as follows:
</p>

<p class="letter">
“Sir,<br />
    “In the eyes of the world I am sure that I have no cause for pride or
self-esteem. I am much too insignificant for that. But what may be so to other
men’s eyes is not so to yours. I am convinced that you are better than
other people. Doktorenko disagrees with me, but I am content to differ from him
on this point. I will never accept one single copeck from you, but you have
helped my mother, and I am bound to be grateful to you for that, however weak
it may seem. At any rate, I have changed my opinion about you, and I think
right to inform you of the fact; but I also suppose that there can be no
further intercourse between us.
</p>

<p class="right">
“Antip Burdovsky.
</p>

<p class="letter">
“P.S.—The two hundred roubles I owe you shall certainly be repaid
in time.”
</p>

<p>
“How extremely stupid!” cried Mrs. Epanchin, giving back the letter
abruptly. “It was not worth the trouble of reading. Why are you
smiling?”
</p>

<p>
“Confess that you are pleased to have read it.”
</p>

<p>
“What! Pleased with all that nonsense! Why, cannot you see that they are
all infatuated with pride and vanity?”
</p>

<p>
“He has acknowledged himself to be in the wrong. Don’t you see that
the greater his vanity, the more difficult this admission must have been on his
part? Oh, what a little child you are, Lizabetha Prokofievna!”
</p>

<p>
“Are you tempting me to box your ears for you, or what?”
</p>

<p>
“Not at all. I am only proving that you are glad about the letter. Why
conceal your real feelings? You always like to do it.”
</p>

<p>
“Never come near my house again!” cried Mrs. Epanchin, pale with
rage. “Don’t let me see as much as a <i>shadow</i> of you about the
place! Do you hear?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh yes, and in three days you’ll come and invite me yourself.
Aren’t you ashamed now? These are your best feelings; you are only
tormenting yourself.”
</p>

<p>
“I’ll die before I invite you! I shall forget your very name!
I’ve forgotten it already!”
</p>

<p>
She marched towards the door.
</p>

<p>
“But I’m forbidden your house as it is, without your added
threats!” cried the prince after her.
</p>

<p>
“What? Who forbade you?”
</p>

<p>
She turned round so suddenly that one might have supposed a needle had been
stuck into her.
</p>

<p>
The prince hesitated. He perceived that he had said too much now.
</p>

<p>
“<i>Who</i> forbade you?” cried Mrs. Epanchin once more.
</p>

<p>
“Aglaya Ivanovna told me—”
</p>

<p>
“When? Speak—quick!”
</p>

<p>
“She sent to say, yesterday morning, that I was never to dare to come
near the house again.”
</p>

<p>
Lizabetha Prokofievna stood like a stone.
</p>

<p>
“What did she send? Whom? Was it that boy? Was it a
message?—quick!”
</p>

<p>
“I had a note,” said the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Where is it? Give it here, at once.”
</p>

<p>
The prince thought a moment. Then he pulled out of his waistcoat pocket an
untidy slip of paper, on which was scrawled:
</p>

<p class="letter">
“P<small>RINCE</small> L<small>EF</small>
N<small>ICOLAIEVITCH</small>,—If you think fit, after all that has
passed, to honour our house with a visit, I can assure you you will not find me
among the number of those who are in any way delighted to see you.
</p>

<p class="right">
“Aglaya Epanchin.”
</p>

<p>
Mrs. Epanchin reflected a moment. The next minute she flew at the prince,
seized his hand, and dragged him after her to the door.
</p>

<p>
“Quick—come along!” she cried, breathless with agitation and
impatience. “Come along with me this moment!”
</p>

<p>
“But you declared I wasn’t—”
</p>

<p>
“Don’t be a simpleton. You behave just as though you weren’t
a man at all. Come on! I shall see, now, with my own eyes. I shall see
all.”
</p>

<p>
“Well, let me get my hat, at least.”
</p>

<p>
“Here’s your miserable hat. He couldn’t even choose a
respectable shape for his hat! Come on! She did that because I took your part
and said you ought to have come—little vixen!—else she would never
have sent you that silly note. It’s a most improper note, I call it; most
improper for such an intelligent, well-brought-up girl to write. H’m! I
dare say she was annoyed that you didn’t come; but she ought to have
known that one can’t write like that to an idiot like you, for
you’d be sure to take it literally.” Mrs. Epanchin was dragging the
prince along with her all the time, and never let go of his hand for an
instant. “What are you listening for?” she added, seeing that she
had committed herself a little. “She wants a clown like you—she
hasn’t seen one for some time—to play with. That’s why she is
anxious for you to come to the house. And right glad I am that she’ll
make a thorough good fool of you. You deserve it; and she can do it—oh!
she can, indeed!—as well as most people.”
</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
