<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			
<h2><a name="part03" id="part03"></a>PART III</h2>

<h3>I.</h3>

<p>
The Epanchin family, or at least the more serious members of it, were sometimes
grieved because they seemed so unlike the rest of the world. They were not
quite certain, but had at times a strong suspicion that things did not happen
to them as they did to other people. Others led a quiet, uneventful life, while
they were subject to continual upheavals. Others kept on the rails without
difficulty; they ran off at the slightest obstacle. Other houses were governed
by a timid routine; theirs was somehow different. Perhaps Lizabetha Prokofievna
was alone in making these fretful observations; the girls, though not wanting
in intelligence, were still young; the general was intelligent, too, but
narrow, and in any difficulty he was content to say, “H’m!”
and leave the matter to his wife. Consequently, on her fell the responsibility.
It was not that they distinguished themselves as a family by any particular
originality, or that their excursions off the track led to any breach of the
proprieties. Oh no.
</p>

<p>
There was nothing premeditated, there was not even any conscious purpose in it
all, and yet, in spite of everything, the family, although highly respected,
was not quite what every highly respected family ought to be. For a long time
now Lizabetha Prokofievna had had it in her mind that all the trouble was owing
to her “unfortunate character,” and this added to her distress. She
blamed her own stupid unconventional “eccentricity.” Always
restless, always on the go, she constantly seemed to lose her way, and to get
into trouble over the simplest and more ordinary affairs of life.
</p>

<p>
We said at the beginning of our story, that the Epanchins were liked and
esteemed by their neighbours. In spite of his humble origin, Ivan Fedorovitch
himself was received everywhere with respect. He deserved this, partly on
account of his wealth and position, partly because, though limited, he was
really a very good fellow. But a certain limitation of mind seems to be an
indispensable asset, if not to all public personages, at least to all serious
financiers. Added to this, his manner was modest and unassuming; he knew when
to be silent, yet never allowed himself to be trampled upon. Also—and
this was more important than all—he had the advantage of being under
exalted patronage.
</p>

<p>
As to Lizabetha Prokofievna, she, as the reader knows, belonged to an
aristocratic family. True, Russians think more of influential friends than of
birth, but she had both. She was esteemed and even loved by people of
consequence in society, whose example in receiving her was therefore followed
by others. It seems hardly necessary to remark that her family worries and
anxieties had little or no foundation, or that her imagination increased them
to an absurd degree; but if you have a wart on your forehead or nose, you
imagine that all the world is looking at it, and that people would make fun of
you because of it, even if you had discovered America! Doubtless Lizabetha
Prokofievna was considered “eccentric” in society, but she was none
the less esteemed: the pity was that she was ceasing to believe in that esteem.
When she thought of her daughters, she said to herself sorrowfully that she was
a hindrance rather than a help to their future, that her character and temper
were absurd, ridiculous, insupportable. Naturally, she put the blame on her
surroundings, and from morning to night was quarrelling with her husband and
children, whom she really loved to the point of self-sacrifice, even, one might
say, of passion.
</p>

<p>
She was, above all distressed by the idea that her daughters might grow up
“eccentric,” like herself; she believed that no other society girls
were like them. “They are growing into Nihilists!” she repeated
over and over again. For years she had tormented herself with this idea, and
with the question: “Why don’t they get married?”
</p>

<p>
“It is to annoy their mother; that is their one aim in life; it can be
nothing else. The fact is it is all of a piece with these modern ideas, that
wretched woman’s question! Six months ago Aglaya took a fancy to cut off
her magnificent hair. Why, even I, when I was young, had nothing like it! The
scissors were in her hand, and I had to go down on my knees and implore her...
She did it, I know, from sheer mischief, to spite her mother, for she is a
naughty, capricious girl, a real spoiled child spiteful and mischievous to a
degree! And then Alexandra wanted to shave her head, not from caprice or
mischief, but, like a little fool, simply because Aglaya persuaded her she
would sleep better without her hair, and not suffer from headache! And how many
suitors have they not had during the last five years! Excellent offers, too!
What more do they want? Why don’t they get married? For no other reason
than to vex their mother—none—none!”
</p>

<p>
But Lizabetha Prokofievna felt somewhat consoled when she could say that one of
her girls, Adelaida, was settled at last. “It will be one off our
hands!” she declared aloud, though in private she expressed herself with
greater tenderness. The engagement was both happy and suitable, and was
therefore approved in society. Prince S. was a distinguished man, he had money,
and his future wife was devoted to him; what more could be desired? Lizabetha
Prokofievna had felt less anxious about this daughter, however, although she
considered her artistic tastes suspicious. But to make up for them she was, as
her mother expressed it, “merry,” and had plenty of
“common-sense.” It was Aglaya’s future which disturbed her
most. With regard to her eldest daughter, Alexandra, the mother never quite
knew whether there was cause for anxiety or not. Sometimes she felt as if there
was nothing to be expected from her. She was twenty-five now, and must be fated
to be an old maid, and “with such beauty, too!” The mother spent
whole nights in weeping and lamenting, while all the time the cause of her
grief slumbered peacefully. “What is the matter with her? Is she a
Nihilist, or simply a fool?”
</p>

<p>
But Lizabetha Prokofievna knew perfectly well how unnecessary was the last
question. She set a high value on Alexandra Ivanovna’s judgment, and
often consulted her in difficulties; but that she was a ‘wet hen’
she never for a moment doubted. “She is so calm; nothing rouses
her—though wet hens are not always calm! Oh! I can’t understand
it!” Her eldest daughter inspired Lizabetha with a kind of puzzled
compassion. She did not feel this in Aglaya’s case, though the latter was
her idol. It may be said that these outbursts and epithets, such as “wet
hen” (in which the maternal solicitude usually showed itself), only made
Alexandra laugh. Sometimes the most trivial thing annoyed Mrs. Epanchin, and
drove her into a frenzy. For instance, Alexandra Ivanovna liked to sleep late,
and was always dreaming, though her dreams had the peculiarity of being as
innocent and naive as those of a child of seven; and the very innocence of her
dreams annoyed her mother. Once she dreamt of nine hens, and this was the cause
of quite a serious quarrel—no one knew why. Another time she had—it
was most unusual—a dream with a spark of originality in it. She dreamt of
a monk in a dark room, into which she was too frightened to go. Adelaida and
Aglaya rushed off with shrieks of laughter to relate this to their mother, but
she was quite angry, and said her daughters were all fools.
</p>

<p>
“H’m! she is as stupid as a fool! A veritable ‘wet
hen’! Nothing excites her; and yet she is not happy; some days it makes
one miserable only to look at her! Why is she unhappy, I wonder?” At
times Lizabetha Prokofievna put this question to her husband, and as usual she
spoke in the threatening tone of one who demands an immediate answer. Ivan
Fedorovitch would frown, shrug his shoulders, and at last give his opinion:
“She needs a husband!”
</p>

<p>
“God forbid that he should share your ideas, Ivan Fedorovitch!” his
wife flashed back. “Or that he should be as gross and churlish as
you!”
</p>

<p>
The general promptly made his escape, and Lizabetha Prokofievna after a while
grew calm again. That evening, of course, she would be unusually attentive,
gentle, and respectful to her “gross and churlish” husband, her
“dear, kind Ivan Fedorovitch,” for she had never left off loving
him. She was even still “in love” with him. He knew it well, and
for his part held her in the greatest esteem.
</p>

<p>
But the mother’s great and continual anxiety was Aglaya. “She is
exactly like me—my image in everything,” said Mrs. Epanchin to
herself. “A tyrant! A real little demon! A Nihilist! Eccentric, senseless
and mischievous! Good Lord, how unhappy she will be!”
</p>

<p>
But as we said before, the fact of Adelaida’s approaching marriage was
balm to the mother. For a whole month she forgot her fears and worries.
</p>

<p>
Adelaida’s fate was settled; and with her name that of Aglaya’s was
linked, in society gossip. People whispered that Aglaya, too, was “as
good as engaged;” and Aglaya always looked so sweet and behaved so well
(during this period), that the mother’s heart was full of joy. Of course,
Evgenie Pavlovitch must be thoroughly studied first, before the final step
should be taken; but, really, how lovely dear Aglaya had become—she
actually grew more beautiful every day! And then—Yes, and then—this
abominable prince showed his face again, and everything went topsy-turvy at
once, and everyone seemed as mad as March hares.
</p>

<p>
What had really happened?
</p>

<p>
If it had been any other family than the Epanchins’, nothing particular
would have happened. But, thanks to Mrs. Epanchin’s invariable fussiness
and anxiety, there could not be the slightest hitch in the simplest matters of
everyday life, but she immediately foresaw the most dreadful and alarming
consequences, and suffered accordingly.
</p>

<p>
What then must have been her condition, when, among all the imaginary anxieties
and calamities which so constantly beset her, she now saw looming ahead a
serious cause for annoyance—something really likely to arouse doubts and
suspicions!
</p>

<p>
“How dared they, how <i>dared</i> they write that hateful anonymous
letter informing me that Aglaya is in communication with Nastasia
Philipovna?” she thought, as she dragged the prince along towards her own
house, and again when she sat him down at the round table where the family was
already assembled. “How dared they so much as <i>think</i> of such a
thing? I should <i>die</i> with shame if I thought there was a particle of
truth in it, or if I were to show the letter to Aglaya herself! Who dares play
these jokes upon <i>us</i>, the Epanchins? <i>Why</i> didn’t we go to the
Yelagin instead of coming down here? I <i>told</i> you we had better go to the
Yelagin this summer, Ivan Fedorovitch. It’s all your fault. I dare say it
was that Varia who sent the letter. It’s all Ivan Fedorovitch.
<i>That</i> woman is doing it all for him, I know she is, to show she can make
a fool of him now just as she did when he used to give her pearls.
</p>

<p>
“But after all is said, we are mixed up in it. Your daughters are mixed
up in it, Ivan Fedorovitch; young ladies in society, young ladies at an age to
be married; they were present, they heard everything there was to hear. They
were mixed up with that other scene, too, with those dreadful youths. You must
be pleased to remember they heard it all. I cannot forgive that wretched
prince. I never shall forgive him! And why, if you please, has Aglaya had an
attack of nerves for these last three days? Why has she all but quarrelled with
her sisters, even with Alexandra—whom she respects so much that she
always kisses her hands as though she were her mother? What are all these
riddles of hers that we have to guess? What has Gavrila Ardalionovitch to do
with it? Why did she take upon herself to champion him this morning, and burst
into tears over it? Why is there an allusion to that cursed ‘poor
knight’ in the anonymous letter? And why did I rush off to him just now
like a lunatic, and drag him back here? I do believe I’ve gone mad at
last. What on earth have I done now? To talk to a young man about my
daughter’s secrets—and secrets having to do with himself, too!
Thank goodness, he’s an idiot, and a friend of the house! Surely Aglaya
hasn’t fallen in love with such a gaby! What an idea! Pfu! we ought all
to be put under glass cases—myself first of all—and be shown off as
curiosities, at ten copecks a peep!”
</p>

<p>
“I shall never forgive you for all this, Ivan Fedorovitch—never!
Look at her now. Why doesn’t she make fun of him? She said she would, and
she doesn’t. Look there! She stares at him with all her eyes, and
doesn’t move; and yet she told him not to come. He looks pale enough; and
that abominable chatterbox, Evgenie Pavlovitch, monopolizes the whole of the
conversation. Nobody else can get a word in. I could soon find out all about
everything if I could only change the subject.”
</p>

<p>
The prince certainly was very pale. He sat at the table and seemed to be
feeling, by turns, sensations of alarm and rapture.
</p>

<p>
Oh, how frightened he was of looking to one side—one particular
corner—whence he knew very well that a pair of dark eyes were watching
him intently, and how happy he was to think that he was once more among them,
and occasionally hearing that well-known voice, although she had written and
forbidden him to come again!
</p>

<p>
“What on earth will she say to me, I wonder?” he thought to
himself.
</p>

<p>
He had not said a word yet; he sat silent and listened to Evgenie
Pavlovitch’s eloquence. The latter had never appeared so happy and
excited as on this evening. The prince listened to him, but for a long time did
not take in a word he said.
</p>

<p>
Excepting Ivan Fedorovitch, who had not as yet returned from town, the whole
family was present. Prince S. was there; and they all intended to go out to
hear the band very soon.
</p>

<p>
Colia arrived presently and joined the circle. “So he is received as
usual, after all,” thought the prince.
</p>

<p>
The Epanchins’ country-house was a charming building, built after the
model of a Swiss chalet, and covered with creepers. It was surrounded on all
sides by a flower garden, and the family sat, as a rule, on the open verandah
as at the prince’s house.
</p>

<p>
The subject under discussion did not appear to be very popular with the
assembly, and some would have been delighted to change it; but Evgenie would
not stop holding forth, and the prince’s arrival seemed to spur him on to
still further oratorical efforts.
</p>

<p>
Lizabetha Prokofievna frowned, but had not as yet grasped the subject, which
seemed to have arisen out of a heated argument. Aglaya sat apart, almost in the
corner, listening in stubborn silence.
</p>

<p>
“Excuse me,” continued Evgenie Pavlovitch hotly, “I
don’t say a word against liberalism. Liberalism is not a sin, it is a
necessary part of a great whole, which whole would collapse and fall to pieces
without it. Liberalism has just as much right to exist as has the most moral
conservatism; but I am attacking <i>Russian</i> liberalism; and I attack it for
the simple reason that a Russian liberal is not a Russian liberal, he is a
non-Russian liberal. Show me a real Russian liberal, and I’ll kiss him
before you all, with pleasure.”
</p>

<p>
“If he cared to kiss you, that is,” said Alexandra, whose cheeks
were red with irritation and excitement.
</p>

<p>
“Look at that, now,” thought the mother to herself, “she does
nothing but sleep and eat for a year at a time, and then suddenly flies out in
the most incomprehensible way!”
</p>

<p>
The prince observed that Alexandra appeared to be angry with Evgenie, because
he spoke on a serious subject in a frivolous manner, pretending to be in
earnest, but with an under-current of irony.
</p>

<p>
“I was saying just now, before you came in, prince, that there has been
nothing national up to now, about our liberalism, and nothing the liberals do,
or have done, is in the least degree national. They are drawn from two classes
only, the old landowning class, and clerical families—”
</p>

<p>
“How, nothing that they have done is Russian?” asked Prince S.
</p>

<p>
“It may be Russian, but it is not national. Our liberals are not Russian,
nor are our conservatives, and you may be sure that the nation does not
recognize anything that has been done by the landed gentry, or by the
seminarists, or what is to be done either.”
</p>

<p>
“Come, that’s good! How can you maintain such a paradox? If you are
serious, that is. I cannot allow such a statement about the landed proprietors
to pass unchallenged. Why, you are a landed proprietor yourself!” cried
Prince S. hotly.
</p>

<p>
“I suppose you’ll say there is nothing national about our
literature either?” said Alexandra.
</p>

<p>
“Well, I am not a great authority on literary questions, but I certainly
do hold that Russian literature is not Russian, except perhaps Lomonosoff,
Pouschkin and Gogol.”
</p>

<p>
“In the first place, that is a considerable admission, and in the second
place, one of the above was a peasant, and the other two were both landed
proprietors!”
</p>

<p>
“Quite so, but don’t be in such a hurry! For since it has been the
part of these three men, and only these three, to say something absolutely
their own, not borrowed, so by this very fact these three men become really
national. If any Russian shall have done or said anything really and absolutely
original, he is to be called national from that moment, though he may not be
able to talk the Russian language; still he is a national Russian. I consider
that an axiom. But we were not speaking of literature; we began by discussing
the socialists. Very well then, I insist that there does not exist one single
Russian socialist. There does not, and there has never existed such a one,
because all socialists are derived from the two classes—the landed
proprietors, and the seminarists. All our eminent socialists are merely old
liberals of the class of landed proprietors, men who were liberals in the days
of serfdom. Why do you laugh? Give me their books, give me their studies, their
memoirs, and though I am not a literary critic, yet I will prove as clear as
day that every chapter and every word of their writings has been the work of a
former landed proprietor of the old school. You’ll find that all their
raptures, all their generous transports are proprietary, all their woes and
their tears, proprietary; all proprietary or seminarist! You are laughing
again, and you, prince, are smiling too. Don’t you agree with me?”
</p>

<p>
It was true enough that everybody was laughing, the prince among them.
</p>

<p>
“I cannot tell you on the instant whether I agree with you or not,”
said the latter, suddenly stopping his laughter, and starting like a schoolboy
caught at mischief. “But, I assure you, I am listening to you with
extreme gratification.”
</p>

<p>
So saying, he almost panted with agitation, and a cold sweat stood upon his
forehead. These were his first words since he had entered the house; he tried
to lift his eyes, and look around, but dared not; Evgenie Pavlovitch noticed
his confusion, and smiled.
</p>

<p>
“I’ll just tell you one fact, ladies and gentlemen,”
continued the latter, with apparent seriousness and even exaltation of manner,
but with a suggestion of “chaff” behind every word, as though he
were laughing in his sleeve at his own nonsense—“a fact, the
discovery of which, I believe, I may claim to have made by myself alone. At all
events, no other has ever said or written a word about it; and in this fact is
expressed the whole essence of Russian liberalism of the sort which I am now
considering.
</p>

<p>
“In the first place, what is liberalism, speaking generally, but an
attack (whether mistaken or reasonable, is quite another question) upon the
existing order of things? Is this so? Yes. Very well. Then my
‘fact’ consists in this, that <i>Russian</i> liberalism is not an
attack upon the existing order of things, but an attack upon the very essence
of things themselves—indeed, on the things themselves; not an attack on
the Russian order of things, but on Russia itself. My Russian liberal goes so
far as to reject Russia; that is, he hates and strikes his own mother. Every
misfortune and mishap of the mother-country fills him with mirth, and even with
ecstasy. He hates the national customs, Russian history, and everything. If he
has a justification, it is that he does not know what he is doing, and believes
that his hatred of Russia is the grandest and most profitable kind of
liberalism. (You will often find a liberal who is applauded and esteemed by his
fellows, but who is in reality the dreariest, blindest, dullest of
conservatives, and is not aware of the fact.) This hatred for Russia has been
mistaken by some of our ‘Russian liberals’ for sincere love of
their country, and they boast that they see better than their neighbours what
real love of one’s country should consist in. But of late they have
grown, more candid and are ashamed of the expression ‘love of
country,’ and have annihilated the very spirit of the words as something
injurious and petty and undignified. This is the truth, and I hold by it; but
at the same time it is a phenomenon which has not been repeated at any other
time or place; and therefore, though I hold to it as a fact, yet I recognize
that it is an accidental phenomenon, and may likely enough pass away. There can
be no such thing anywhere else as a liberal who really hates his country; and
how is this fact to be explained among <i>us?</i> By my original statement that
a Russian liberal is <i>not</i> a <i>Russian</i> liberal—that’s the
only explanation that I can see.”
</p>

<p>
“I take all that you have said as a joke,” said Prince S.
seriously.
</p>

<p>
“I have not seen all kinds of liberals, and cannot, therefore, set myself
up as a judge,” said Alexandra, “but I have heard all you have said
with indignation. You have taken some accidental case and twisted it into a
universal law, which is unjust.”
</p>

<p>
“Accidental case!” said Evgenie Pavlovitch. “Do you consider
it an accidental case, prince?”
</p>

<p>
“I must also admit,” said the prince, “that I have not seen
much, or been very far into the question; but I cannot help thinking that you
are more or less right, and that Russian liberalism—that phase of it
which you are considering, at least—really is sometimes inclined to hate
Russia itself, and not only its existing order of things in general. Of course
this is only <i>partially</i> the truth; you cannot lay down the law for
all...”
</p>

<p>
The prince blushed and broke off, without finishing what he meant to say.
</p>

<p>
In spite of his shyness and agitation, he could not help being greatly
interested in the conversation. A special characteristic of his was the naive
candour with which he always listened to arguments which interested him, and
with which he answered any questions put to him on the subject at issue. In the
very expression of his face this naivete was unmistakably evident, this
disbelief in the insincerity of others, and unsuspecting disregard of irony or
humour in their words.
</p>

<p>
But though Evgenie Pavlovitch had put his questions to the prince with no other
purpose but to enjoy the joke of his simple-minded seriousness, yet now, at his
answer, he was surprised into some seriousness himself, and looked gravely at
Muishkin as though he had not expected that sort of answer at all.
</p>

<p>
“Why, how strange!” he ejaculated. “You didn’t answer
me seriously, surely, did you?”
</p>

<p>
“Did not you ask me the question seriously” inquired the prince, in
amazement.
</p>

<p>
Everybody laughed.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, trust <i>him</i> for that!” said Adelaida. “Evgenie
Pavlovitch turns everything and everybody he can lay hold of to ridicule. You
should hear the things he says sometimes, apparently in perfect
seriousness.”
</p>

<p>
“In my opinion the conversation has been a painful one throughout, and we
ought never to have begun it,” said Alexandra. “We were all going
for a walk—”
</p>

<p>
“Come along then,” said Evgenie; “it’s a glorious
evening. But, to prove that this time I was speaking absolutely seriously, and
especially to prove this to the prince (for you, prince, have interested me
exceedingly, and I swear to you that I am not quite such an ass as I like to
appear sometimes, although I am rather an ass, I admit), and—well, ladies
and gentlemen, will you allow me to put just one more question to the prince,
out of pure curiosity? It shall be the last. This question came into my mind a
couple of hours since (you see, prince, I do think seriously at times), and I
made my own decision upon it; now I wish to hear what the prince will say to
it.”
</p>

<p>
“We have just used the expression ‘accidental case.’ This is
a significant phrase; we often hear it. Well, not long since everyone was
talking and reading about that terrible murder of six people on the part of
a—young fellow, and of the extraordinary speech of the counsel for the
defence, who observed that in the poverty-stricken condition of the criminal it
must have come <i>naturally</i> into his head to kill these six people. I do
not quote his words, but that is the sense of them, or something very like it.
Now, in my opinion, the barrister who put forward this extraordinary plea was
probably absolutely convinced that he was stating the most liberal, the most
humane, the most enlightened view of the case that could possibly be brought
forward in these days. Now, was this distortion, this capacity for a perverted
way of viewing things, a special or accidental case, or is such a general
rule?”
</p>

<p>
Everyone laughed at this.
</p>

<p>
“A special case—accidental, of course!” cried Alexandra and
Adelaida.
</p>

<p>
“Let me remind you once more, Evgenie,” said Prince S., “that
your joke is getting a little threadbare.”
</p>

<p>
“What do you think about it, prince?” asked Evgenie, taking no
notice of the last remark, and observing Muishkin’s serious eyes fixed
upon his face. “What do you think—was it a special or a usual
case—the rule, or an exception? I confess I put the question especially
for you.”
</p>

<p>
“No, I don’t think it was a special case,” said the prince,
quietly, but firmly.
</p>

<p>
“My dear fellow!” cried Prince S., with some annoyance,
“don’t you see that he is chaffing you? He is simply laughing at
you, and wants to make game of you.”
</p>

<p>
“I thought Evgenie Pavlovitch was talking seriously,” said the
prince, blushing and dropping his eyes.
</p>

<p>
“My dear prince,” continued Prince S. “remember what you and
I were saying two or three months ago. We spoke of the fact that in our newly
opened Law Courts one could already lay one’s finger upon so many
talented and remarkable young barristers. How pleased you were with the state
of things as we found it, and how glad I was to observe your delight! We both
said it was a matter to be proud of; but this clumsy defence that Evgenie
mentions, this strange argument <i>can</i>, of course, only be an accidental
case—one in a thousand!”
</p>

<p>
The prince reflected a little, but very soon he replied, with absolute
conviction in his tone, though he still spoke somewhat shyly and timidly:
</p>

<p>
“I only wished to say that this ‘distortion,’ as Evgenie
Pavlovitch expressed it, is met with very often, and is far more the general
rule than the exception, unfortunately for Russia. So much so, that if this
distortion were not the general rule, perhaps these dreadful crimes would be
less frequent.”
</p>

<p>
“Dreadful crimes? But I can assure you that crimes just as dreadful, and
probably more horrible, have occurred before our times, and at all times, and
not only here in Russia, but everywhere else as well. And in my opinion it is
not at all likely that such murders will cease to occur for a very long time to
come. The only difference is that in former times there was less publicity,
while now everyone talks and writes freely about such things—which fact
gives the impression that such crimes have only now sprung into existence. That
is where your mistake lies—an extremely natural mistake, I assure you, my
dear fellow!” said Prince S.
</p>

<p>
“I know that there were just as many, and just as terrible, crimes before
our times. Not long since I visited a convict prison and made acquaintance with
some of the criminals. There were some even more dreadful criminals than this
one we have been speaking of—men who have murdered a dozen of their
fellow-creatures, and feel no remorse whatever. But what I especially noticed
was this, that the very most hopeless and remorseless murderer—however
hardened a criminal he may be—still <i>knows that he is a criminal</i>;
that is, he is conscious that he has acted wickedly, though he may feel no
remorse whatever. And they were all like this. Those of whom Evgenie Pavlovitch
has spoken, do not admit that they are criminals at all; they think they had a
right to do what they did, and that they were even doing a good deed, perhaps.
I consider there is the greatest difference between the two cases. And
recollect—it was a <i>youth</i>, at the particular age which is most
helplessly susceptible to the distortion of ideas!”
</p>

<p>
Prince S. was now no longer smiling; he gazed at the prince in bewilderment.
</p>

<p>
Alexandra, who had seemed to wish to put in her word when the prince began, now
sat silent, as though some sudden thought had caused her to change her mind
about speaking.
</p>

<p>
Evgenie Pavlovitch gazed at him in real surprise, and this time his expression
of face had no mockery in it whatever.
</p>

<p>
“What are you looking so surprised about, my friend?” asked Mrs.
Epanchin, suddenly. “Did you suppose he was stupider than yourself, and
was incapable of forming his own opinions, or what?”
</p>

<p>
“No! Oh no! Not at all!” said Evgenie. “But—how is it,
prince, that you—(excuse the question, will you?)—if you are
capable of observing and seeing things as you evidently do, how is it that you
saw nothing distorted or perverted in that claim upon your property, which you
acknowledged a day or two since; and which was full of arguments founded upon
the most distorted views of right and wrong?”
</p>

<p>
“I’ll tell you what, my friend,” cried Mrs. Epanchin, of a
sudden, “here are we all sitting here and imagining we are very clever,
and perhaps laughing at the prince, some of us, and meanwhile he has received a
letter this very day in which that same claimant renounces his claim, and begs
the prince’s pardon. There! <i>we</i> don’t often get that sort of
letter; and yet we are not ashamed to walk with our noses in the air before
him.”
</p>

<p>
“And Hippolyte has come down here to stay,” said Colia, suddenly.
</p>

<p>
“What! has he arrived?” said the prince, starting up.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I brought him down from town just after you had left the
house.”
</p>

<p>
“There now! It’s just like him,” cried Lizabetha Prokofievna,
boiling over once more, and entirely oblivious of the fact that she had just
taken the prince’s part. “I dare swear that you went up to town
yesterday on purpose to get the little wretch to do you the great honour of
coming to stay at your house. You did go up to town, you know you did—you
said so yourself! Now then, did you, or did you not, go down on your knees and
beg him to come, confess!”
</p>

<p>
“No, he didn’t, for I saw it all myself,” said Colia.
“On the contrary, Hippolyte kissed his hand twice and thanked him; and
all the prince said was that he thought Hippolyte might feel better here in the
country!”
</p>

<p>
“Don’t, Colia,—what is the use of saying all that?”
cried the prince, rising and taking his hat.
</p>

<p>
“Where are you going to now?” cried Mrs. Epanchin.
</p>

<p>
“Never mind about him now, prince,” said Colia. “He is all
right and taking a nap after the journey. He is very happy to be here; but I
think perhaps it would be better if you let him alone for today,—he is
very sensitive now that he is so ill—and he might be embarrassed if you
show him too much attention at first. He is decidedly better today, and says he
has not felt so well for the last six months, and has coughed much less,
too.”
</p>

<p>
The prince observed that Aglaya came out of her corner and approached the table
at this point.
</p>

<p>
He did not dare look at her, but he was conscious, to the very tips of his
fingers, that she was gazing at him, perhaps angrily; and that she had probably
flushed up with a look of fiery indignation in her black eyes.
</p>

<p>
“It seems to me, Mr. Colia, that you were very foolish to bring your
young friend down—if he is the same consumptive boy who wept so
profusely, and invited us all to his own funeral,” remarked Evgenie
Pavlovitch. “He talked so eloquently about the blank wall outside his
bedroom window, that I’m sure he will never support life here without
it.”
</p>

<p>
“I think so too,” said Mrs. Epanchin; “he will quarrel with
you, and be off,” and she drew her workbox towards her with an air of
dignity, quite oblivious of the fact that the family was about to start for a
walk in the park.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I remember he boasted about the blank wall in an extraordinary
way,” continued Evgenie, “and I feel that without that blank wall
he will never be able to die eloquently; and he does so long to die
eloquently!”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, you must forgive him the blank wall,” said the prince,
quietly. “He has come down to see a few trees now, poor fellow.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, I forgive him with all my heart; you may tell him so if you
like,” laughed Evgenie.
</p>

<p>
“I don’t think you should take it quite like that,” said the
prince, quietly, and without removing his eyes from the carpet. “I think
it is more a case of his forgiving you.”
</p>

<p>
“Forgiving me! why so? What have I done to need his forgiveness?”
</p>

<p>
“If you don’t understand, then—but of course, you do
understand. He wished—he wished to bless you all round and to have your
blessing—before he died—that’s all.”
</p>

<p>
“My dear prince,” began Prince S., hurriedly, exchanging glances
with some of those present, “you will not easily find heaven on earth,
and yet you seem to expect to. Heaven is a difficult thing to find anywhere,
prince; far more difficult than appears to that good heart of yours. Better
stop this conversation, or we shall all be growing quite disturbed in our
minds, and—”
</p>

<p>
“Let’s go and hear the band, then,” said Lizabetha
Prokofievna, angrily rising from her place.
</p>

<p>
The rest of the company followed her example.
</p>

<h3>II.</h3>

<p>
The prince suddenly approached Evgenie Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
“Evgenie Pavlovitch,” he said, with strange excitement and seizing
the latter’s hand in his own, “be assured that I esteem you as a
generous and honourable man, in spite of everything. Be assured of that.”
</p>

<p>
Evgenie Pavlovitch fell back a step in astonishment. For one moment it was all
he could do to restrain himself from bursting out laughing; but, looking
closer, he observed that the prince did not seem to be quite himself; at all
events, he was in a very curious state.
</p>

<p>
“I wouldn’t mind betting, prince,” he cried, “that you
did not in the least mean to say that, and very likely you meant to address
someone else altogether. What is it? Are you feeling unwell or anything?”
</p>

<p>
“Very likely, extremely likely, and you must be a very close observer to
detect the fact that perhaps I did not intend to come up to <i>you</i> at
all.”
</p>

<p>
So saying he smiled strangely; but suddenly and excitedly he began again:
</p>

<p>
“Don’t remind me of what I have done or said. Don’t! I am
very much ashamed of myself, I—”
</p>

<p>
“Why, what have you done? I don’t understand you.”
</p>

<p>
“I see you are ashamed of me, Evgenie Pavlovitch; you are blushing for
me; that’s a sign of a good heart. Don’t be afraid; I shall go away
directly.”
</p>

<p>
“What’s the matter with him? Do his fits begin like that?”
said Lizabetha Prokofievna, in a high state of alarm, addressing Colia.
</p>

<p>
“No, no, Lizabetha Prokofievna, take no notice of me. I am not going to
have a fit. I will go away directly; but I know I am afflicted. I was
twenty-four years an invalid, you see—the first twenty-four years of my
life—so take all I do and say as the sayings and actions of an invalid.
I’m going away directly, I really am—don’t be afraid. I am
not blushing, for I don’t think I need blush about it, need I? But I see
that I am out of place in society—society is better without me.
It’s not vanity, I assure you. I have thought over it all these last
three days, and I have made up my mind that I ought to unbosom myself candidly
before you at the first opportunity. There are certain things, certain great
ideas, which I must not so much as approach, as Prince S. has just reminded me,
or I shall make you all laugh. I have no sense of proportion, I know; my words
and gestures do not express my ideas—they are a humiliation and abasement
of the ideas, and therefore, I have no right—and I am too sensitive.
Still, I believe I am beloved in this household, and esteemed far more than I
deserve. But I can’t help knowing that after twenty-four years of illness
there must be some trace left, so that it is impossible for people to refrain
from laughing at me sometimes; don’t you think so?”
</p>

<p>
He seemed to pause for a reply, for some verdict, as it were, and looked humbly
around him.
</p>

<p>
All present stood rooted to the earth with amazement at this unexpected and
apparently uncalled-for outbreak; but the poor prince’s painful and
rambling speech gave rise to a strange episode.
</p>

<p>
“Why do you say all this here?” cried Aglaya, suddenly. “Why
do you talk like this to <i>them?</i>”
</p>

<p>
She appeared to be in the last stages of wrath and irritation; her eyes
flashed. The prince stood dumbly and blindly before her, and suddenly grew
pale.
</p>

<p>
“There is not one of them all who is worthy of these words of
yours,” continued Aglaya. “Not one of them is worth your little
finger, not one of them has heart or head to compare with yours! You are more
honest than all, and better, nobler, kinder, wiser than all. There are some
here who are unworthy to bend and pick up the handkerchief you have just
dropped. Why do you humiliate yourself like this, and place yourself lower than
these people? Why do you debase yourself before them? Why have you no
pride?”
</p>

<p>
“My God! Who would ever have believed this?” cried Mrs. Epanchin,
wringing her hands.
</p>

<p>
“Hurrah for the ‘poor knight’!” cried Colia.
</p>

<p>
“Be quiet! How dare they laugh at me in your house?” said Aglaya,
turning sharply on her mother in that hysterical frame of mind that rides
recklessly over every obstacle and plunges blindly through proprieties.
“Why does everyone, everyone worry and torment me? Why have they all been
bullying me these three days about you, prince? I will not marry
you—never, and under no circumstances! Know that once and for all; as if
anyone could marry an absurd creature like you! Just look in the glass and see
what you look like, this very moment! Why, <i>why</i> do they torment me and
say I am going to marry you? You must know it; you are in the plot with
them!”
</p>

<p>
“No one ever tormented you on the subject,” murmured Adelaida,
aghast.
</p>

<p>
“No one ever thought of such a thing! There has never been a word said
about it!” cried Alexandra.
</p>

<p>
“Who has been annoying her? Who has been tormenting the child? Who could
have said such a thing to her? Is she raving?” cried Lizabetha
Prokofievna, trembling with rage, to the company in general.
</p>

<p>
“Every one of them has been saying it—every one of them—all
these three days! And I will never, never marry him!”
</p>

<p>
So saying, Aglaya burst into bitter tears, and, hiding her face in her
handkerchief, sank back into a chair.
</p>

<p>
“But he has never even—”
</p>

<p>
“I have never asked you to marry me, Aglaya Ivanovna!” said the
prince, of a sudden.
</p>

<p>
“<i>What?</i>” cried Mrs. Epanchin, raising her hands in horror.
“<i>What’s</i> that?”
</p>

<p>
She could not believe her ears.
</p>

<p>
“I meant to say—I only meant to say,” said the prince,
faltering, “I merely meant to explain to Aglaya Ivanovna—to have
the honour to explain, as it were—that I had no intention—never
had—to ask the honour of her hand. I assure you I am not guilty, Aglaya
Ivanovna, I am not, indeed. I never did wish to—I never thought of it at
all—and never shall—you’ll see it yourself—you may be
quite assured of it. Some wicked person has been maligning me to you; but
it’s all right. Don’t worry about it.”
</p>

<p>
So saying, the prince approached Aglaya.
</p>

<p>
She took the handkerchief from her face, glanced keenly at him, took in what he
had said, and burst out laughing—such a merry, unrestrained laugh, so
hearty and gay, that Adelaida could not contain herself. She, too, glanced at
the prince’s panic-stricken countenance, then rushed at her sister, threw
her arms round her neck, and burst into as merry a fit of laughter as
Aglaya’s own. They laughed together like a couple of school-girls.
Hearing and seeing this, the prince smiled happily, and in accents of relief
and joy, he exclaimed “Well, thank God—thank God!”
</p>

<p>
Alexandra now joined in, and it looked as though the three sisters were going
to laugh on for ever.
</p>

<p>
“They are insane,” muttered Lizabetha Prokofievna. “Either
they frighten one out of one’s wits, or else—”
</p>

<p>
But Prince S. was laughing now, too, so was Evgenie Pavlovitch, so was Colia,
and so was the prince himself, who caught the infection as he looked round
radiantly upon the others.
</p>

<p>
“Come along, let’s go out for a walk!” cried Adelaida.
“We’ll all go together, and the prince must absolutely go with us.
You needn’t go away, you dear good fellow! <i>Isn’t</i> he a dear,
Aglaya? Isn’t he, mother? I must really give him a kiss for—for his
explanation to Aglaya just now. Mother, dear, I may kiss him, mayn’t I?
Aglaya, may I kiss <i>your</i> prince?” cried the young rogue, and sure
enough she skipped up to the prince and kissed his forehead.
</p>

<p>
He seized her hands, and pressed them so hard that Adelaida nearly cried out;
he then gazed with delight into her eyes, and raising her right hand to his
lips with enthusiasm, kissed it three times.
</p>

<p>
“Come along,” said Aglaya. “Prince, you must walk with me.
May he, mother? This young cavalier, who won’t have me? You said you
would <i>never</i> have me, didn’t you, prince? No—no, not like
that; <i>that’s</i> not the way to give your arm. Don’t you know
how to give your arm to a lady yet? There—so. Now, come along, you and I
will lead the way. Would you like to lead the way with me alone,
tête-à-tête?”
</p>

<p>
She went on talking and chatting without a pause, with occasional little bursts
of laughter between.
</p>

<p>
“Thank God—thank God!” said Lizabetha Prokofievna to herself,
without quite knowing why she felt so relieved.
</p>

<p>
“What extraordinary people they are!” thought Prince S., for
perhaps the hundredth time since he had entered into intimate relations with
the family; but—he liked these “extraordinary people,” all
the same. As for Prince Lef Nicolaievitch himself, Prince S. did not seem quite
to like him, somehow. He was decidedly preoccupied and a little disturbed as
they all started off.
</p>

<p>
Evgenie Pavlovitch seemed to be in a lively humour. He made Adelaida and
Alexandra laugh all the way to the Vauxhall; but they both laughed so very
readily and promptly that the worthy Evgenie began at last to suspect that they
were not listening to him at all.
</p>

<p>
At this idea, he burst out laughing all at once, in quite unaffected mirth, and
without giving any explanation.
</p>

<p>
The sisters, who also appeared to be in high spirits, never tired of glancing
at Aglaya and the prince, who were walking in front. It was evident that their
younger sister was a thorough puzzle to them both.
</p>

<p>
Prince S. tried hard to get up a conversation with Mrs. Epanchin upon outside
subjects, probably with the good intention of distracting and amusing her; but
he bored her dreadfully. She was absent-minded to a degree, and answered at
cross purposes, and sometimes not at all.
</p>

<p>
But the puzzle and mystery of Aglaya was not yet over for the evening. The last
exhibition fell to the lot of the prince alone. When they had proceeded some
hundred paces or so from the house, Aglaya said to her obstinately silent
cavalier in a quick half-whisper:
</p>

<p>
“Look to the right!”
</p>

<p>
The prince glanced in the direction indicated.
</p>

<p>
“Look closer. Do you see that bench, in the park there, just by those
three big trees—that green bench?”
</p>

<p>
The prince replied that he saw it.
</p>

<p>
“Do you like the position of it? Sometimes of a morning early, at seven
o’clock, when all the rest are still asleep, I come out and sit there
alone.”
</p>

<p>
The prince muttered that the spot was a lovely one.
</p>

<p>
“Now, go away, I don’t wish to have your arm any longer; or
perhaps, better, continue to give me your arm, and walk along beside me, but
don’t speak a word to me. I wish to think by myself.”
</p>

<p>
The warning was certainly unnecessary; for the prince would not have said a
word all the rest of the time whether forbidden to speak or not. His heart beat
loud and painfully when Aglaya spoke of the bench; could she—but no! he
banished the thought, after an instant’s deliberation.
</p>

<p>
At Pavlofsk, on weekdays, the public is more select than it is on Sundays and
Saturdays, when the townsfolk come down to walk about and enjoy the park.
</p>

<p>
The ladies dress elegantly, on these days, and it is the fashion to gather
round the band, which is probably the best of our pleasure-garden bands, and
plays the newest pieces. The behaviour of the public is most correct and
proper, and there is an appearance of friendly intimacy among the usual
frequenters. Many come for nothing but to look at their acquaintances, but
there are others who come for the sake of the music. It is very seldom that
anything happens to break the harmony of the proceedings, though, of course,
accidents will happen everywhere.
</p>

<p>
On this particular evening the weather was lovely, and there were a large
number of people present. All the places anywhere near the orchestra were
occupied.
</p>

<p>
Our friends took chairs near the side exit. The crowd and the music cheered
Mrs. Epanchin a little, and amused the girls; they bowed and shook hands with
some of their friends and nodded at a distance to others; they examined the
ladies’ dresses, noticed comicalities and eccentricities among the
people, and laughed and talked among themselves. Evgenie Pavlovitch, too, found
plenty of friends to bow to. Several people noticed Aglaya and the prince, who
were still together.
</p>

<p>
Before very long two or three young men had come up, and one or two remained to
talk; all of these young men appeared to be on intimate terms with Evgenie
Pavlovitch. Among them was a young officer, a remarkably handsome
fellow—very good-natured and a great chatterbox. He tried to get up a
conversation with Aglaya, and did his best to secure her attention. Aglaya
behaved very graciously to him, and chatted and laughed merrily. Evgenie
Pavlovitch begged the prince’s leave to introduce their friend to him.
The prince hardly realized what was wanted of him, but the introduction came
off; the two men bowed and shook hands.
</p>

<p>
Evgenie Pavlovitch’s friend asked the prince some question, but the
latter did not reply, or if he did, he muttered something so strangely
indistinct that there was nothing to be made of it. The officer stared intently
at him, then glanced at Evgenie, divined why the latter had introduced him, and
gave his undivided attention to Aglaya again. Only Evgenie Pavlovitch observed
that Aglaya flushed up for a moment at this.
</p>

<p>
The prince did not notice that others were talking and making themselves
agreeable to Aglaya; in fact, at moments, he almost forgot that he was sitting
by her himself. At other moments he felt a longing to go away somewhere and be
alone with his thoughts, and to feel that no one knew where he was.
</p>

<p>
Or if that were impossible he would like to be alone at home, on the
terrace—without either Lebedeff or his children, or anyone else about
him, and to lie there and think—a day and night and another day again! He
thought of the mountains—and especially of a certain spot which he used
to frequent, whence he would look down upon the distant valleys and fields, and
see the waterfall, far off, like a little silver thread, and the old ruined
castle in the distance. Oh! how he longed to be there now—alone with his
thoughts—to think of one thing all his life—one thing! A thousand
years would not be too much time! And let everyone here forget him—forget
him utterly! How much better it would have been if they had never known
him—if all this could but prove to be a dream. Perhaps it was a dream!
</p>

<p>
Now and then he looked at Aglaya for five minutes at a time, without taking his
eyes off her face; but his expression was very strange; he would gaze at her as
though she were an object a couple of miles distant, or as though he were
looking at her portrait and not at herself at all.
</p>

<p>
“Why do you look at me like that, prince?” she asked suddenly,
breaking off her merry conversation and laughter with those about her.
“I’m afraid of you! You look as though you were just going to put
out your hand and touch my face to see if it’s real! Doesn’t he,
Evgenie Pavlovitch—doesn’t he look like that?”
</p>

<p>
The prince seemed surprised that he should have been addressed at all; he
reflected a moment, but did not seem to take in what had been said to him; at
all events, he did not answer. But observing that she and the others had begun
to laugh, he too opened his mouth and laughed with them.
</p>

<p>
The laughter became general, and the young officer, who seemed a particularly
lively sort of person, simply shook with mirth.
</p>

<p>
Aglaya suddenly whispered angrily to herself the word—
</p>

<p>
“Idiot!”
</p>

<p>
“My goodness—surely she is not in love with such a—surely she
isn’t mad!” groaned Mrs. Epanchin, under her breath.
</p>

<p>
“It’s all a joke, mamma; it’s just a joke like the
‘poor knight’—nothing more whatever, I assure you!”
Alexandra whispered in her ear. “She is chaffing him—making a fool
of him, after her own private fashion, that’s all! But she carries it
just a little too far—she is a regular little actress. How she frightened
us just now—didn’t she?—and all for a lark!”
</p>

<p>
“Well, it’s lucky she has happened upon an idiot, then,
that’s all I can say!” whispered Lizabetha Prokofievna, who was
somewhat comforted, however, by her daughter’s remark.
</p>

<p>
The prince had heard himself referred to as “idiot,” and had
shuddered at the moment; but his shudder, it so happened, was not caused by the
word applied to him. The fact was that in the crowd, not far from where he was
sitting, a pale familiar face, with curly black hair, and a well-known smile
and expression, had flashed across his vision for a moment, and disappeared
again. Very likely he had imagined it! There only remained to him the
impression of a strange smile, two eyes, and a bright green tie. Whether the
man had disappeared among the crowd, or whether he had turned towards the
Vauxhall, the prince could not say.
</p>

<p>
But a moment or two afterwards he began to glance keenly about him. That first
vision might only too likely be the forerunner of a second; it was almost
certain to be so. Surely he had not forgotten the possibility of such a meeting
when he came to the Vauxhall? True enough, he had not remarked where he was
coming to when he set out with Aglaya; he had not been in a condition to remark
anything at all.
</p>

<p>
Had he been more careful to observe his companion, he would have seen that for
the last quarter of an hour Aglaya had also been glancing around in apparent
anxiety, as though she expected to see someone, or something particular, among
the crowd of people. Now, at the moment when his own anxiety became so marked,
her excitement also increased visibly, and when he looked about him, she did
the same.
</p>

<p>
The reason for their anxiety soon became apparent. From that very side entrance
to the Vauxhall, near which the prince and all the Epanchin party were seated,
there suddenly appeared quite a large knot of persons, at least a dozen.
</p>

<p>
Heading this little band walked three ladies, two of whom were remarkably
lovely; and there was nothing surprising in the fact that they should have had
a large troop of admirers following in their wake.
</p>

<p>
But there was something in the appearance of both the ladies and their admirers
which was peculiar, quite different for that of the rest of the public
assembled around the orchestra.
</p>

<p>
Nearly everyone observed the little band advancing, and all pretended not to
see or notice them, except a few young fellows who exchanged glances and
smiled, saying something to one another in whispers.
</p>

<p>
It was impossible to avoid noticing them, however, in reality, for they made
their presence only too conspicuous by laughing and talking loudly. It was to
be supposed that some of them were more than half drunk, although they were
well enough dressed, some even particularly well. There were one or two,
however, who were very strange-looking creatures, with flushed faces and
extraordinary clothes; some were military men; not all were quite young; one or
two were middle-aged gentlemen of decidedly disagreeable appearance, men who
are avoided in society like the plague, decked out in large gold studs and
rings, and magnificently “got up,” generally.
</p>

<p>
Among our suburban resorts there are some which enjoy a specially high
reputation for respectability and fashion; but the most careful individual is
not absolutely exempt from the danger of a tile falling suddenly upon his head
from his neighbour’s roof.
</p>

<p>
Such a tile was about to descend upon the elegant and decorous public now
assembled to hear the music.
</p>

<p>
In order to pass from the Vauxhall to the band-stand, the visitor has to
descend two or three steps. Just at these steps the group paused, as though it
feared to proceed further; but very quickly one of the three ladies, who formed
its apex, stepped forward into the charmed circle, followed by two members of
her suite.
</p>

<p>
One of these was a middle-aged man of very respectable appearance, but with the
stamp of parvenu upon him, a man whom nobody knew, and who evidently knew
nobody. The other follower was younger and far less respectable-looking.
</p>

<p>
No one else followed the eccentric lady; but as she descended the steps she did
not even look behind her, as though it were absolutely the same to her whether
anyone were following or not. She laughed and talked loudly, however, just as
before. She was dressed with great taste, but with rather more magnificence
than was needed for the occasion, perhaps.
</p>

<p>
She walked past the orchestra, to where an open carriage was waiting, near the
road.
</p>

<p>
The prince had not seen <i>her</i> for more than three months. All these days
since his arrival from Petersburg he had intended to pay her a visit, but some
mysterious presentiment had restrained him. He could not picture to himself
what impression this meeting with her would make upon him, though he had often
tried to imagine it, with fear and trembling. One fact was quite certain, and
that was that the meeting would be painful.
</p>

<p>
Several times during the last six months he had recalled the effect which the
first sight of this face had had upon him, when he only saw its portrait. He
recollected well that even the portrait face had left but too painful an
impression.
</p>

<p>
That month in the provinces, when he had seen this woman nearly every day, had
affected him so deeply that he could not now look back upon it calmly. In the
very look of this woman there was something which tortured him. In conversation
with Rogojin he had attributed this sensation to pity—immeasurable pity,
and this was the truth. The sight of the portrait face alone had filled his
heart full of the agony of real sympathy; and this feeling of sympathy, nay, of
actual <i>suffering</i>, for her, had never left his heart since that hour, and
was still in full force. Oh yes, and more powerful than ever!
</p>

<p>
But the prince was not satisfied with what he had said to Rogojin. Only at this
moment, when she suddenly made her appearance before him, did he realize to the
full the exact emotion which she called up in him, and which he had not
described correctly to Rogojin.
</p>

<p>
And, indeed, there were no words in which he could have expressed his horror,
yes, <i>horror</i>, for he was now fully convinced from his own private
knowledge of her, that the woman was mad.
</p>

<p>
If, loving a woman above everything in the world, or at least having a
foretaste of the possibility of such love for her, one were suddenly to behold
her on a chain, behind bars and under the lash of a keeper, one would feel
something like what the poor prince now felt.
</p>

<p>
“What’s the matter?” asked Aglaya, in a whisper, giving his
sleeve a little tug.
</p>

<p>
He turned his head towards her and glanced at her black and (for some reason)
flashing eyes, tried to smile, and then, apparently forgetting her in an
instant, turned to the right once more, and continued to watch the startling
apparition before him.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia Philipovna was at this moment passing the young ladies’ chairs.
</p>

<p>
Evgenie Pavlovitch continued some apparently extremely funny and interesting
anecdote to Alexandra, speaking quickly and with much animation. The prince
remembered that at this moment Aglaya remarked in a half-whisper:
</p>

<p>
“<i>What</i> a—”
</p>

<p>
She did not finish her indefinite sentence; she restrained herself in a moment;
but it was enough.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia Philipovna, who up to now had been walking along as though she had not
noticed the Epanchin party, suddenly turned her head in their direction, as
though she had just observed Evgenie Pavlovitch sitting there for the first
time.
</p>

<p>
“Why, I declare, here he is!” she cried, stopping suddenly.
“The man one can’t find with all one’s messengers sent about
the place, sitting just under one’s nose, exactly where one never thought
of looking! I thought you were sure to be at your uncle’s by this
time.”
</p>

<p>
Evgenie Pavlovitch flushed up and looked angrily at Nastasia Philipovna, then
turned his back on her.
</p>

<p>
“What! don’t you know about it yet? He doesn’t
know—imagine that! Why, he’s shot himself. Your uncle shot himself
this very morning. I was told at two this afternoon. Half the town must know it
by now. They say there are three hundred and fifty thousand roubles, government
money, missing; some say five hundred thousand. And I was under the impression
that he would leave you a fortune! He’s whistled it all away. A most
depraved old gentleman, really! Well, ta, ta!—bonne chance! Surely you
intend to be off there, don’t you? Ha, ha! You’ve retired from the
army in good time, I see! Plain clothes! Well done, sly rogue! Nonsense! I
see—you knew it all before—I dare say you knew all about it
yesterday-”
</p>

<p>
Although the impudence of this attack, this public proclamation of intimacy, as
it were, was doubtless premeditated, and had its special object, yet Evgenie
Pavlovitch at first seemed to intend to make no show of observing either his
tormentor or her words. But Nastasia’s communication struck him with the
force of a thunderclap. On hearing of his uncle’s death he suddenly grew
as white as a sheet, and turned towards his informant.
</p>

<p>
At this moment, Lizabetha Prokofievna rose swiftly from her seat, beckoned her
companions, and left the place almost at a run.
</p>

<p>
Only the prince stopped behind for a moment, as though in indecision; and
Evgenie Pavlovitch lingered too, for he had not collected his scattered wits.
But the Epanchins had not had time to get more than twenty paces away when a
scandalous episode occurred. The young officer, Evgenie Pavlovitch’s
friend who had been conversing with Aglaya, said aloud in a great state of
indignation:
</p>

<p>
“She ought to be whipped—that’s the only way to deal with
creatures like that—she ought to be whipped!”
</p>

<p>
This gentleman was a confidant of Evgenie’s, and had doubtless heard of
the carriage episode.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia turned to him. Her eyes flashed; she rushed up to a young man standing
near, whom she did not know in the least, but who happened to have in his hand
a thin cane. Seizing this from him, she brought it with all her force across
the face of her insulter.
</p>

<p>
All this occurred, of course, in one instant of time.
</p>

<p>
The young officer, forgetting himself, sprang towards her. Nastasia’s
followers were not by her at the moment (the elderly gentleman having
disappeared altogether, and the younger man simply standing aside and roaring
with laughter).
</p>

<p>
In another moment, of course, the police would have been on the spot, and it
would have gone hard with Nastasia Philipovna had not unexpected aid appeared.
</p>

<p>
Muishkin, who was but a couple of steps away, had time to spring forward and
seize the officer’s arms from behind.
</p>

<p>
The officer, tearing himself from the prince’s grasp, pushed him so
violently backwards that he staggered a few steps and then subsided into a
chair.
</p>

<p>
But there were other defenders for Nastasia on the spot by this time. The
gentleman known as the “boxer” now confronted the enraged officer.
</p>

<p>
“Keller is my name, sir; ex-lieutenant,” he said, very loud.
“If you will accept me as champion of the fair sex, I am at your
disposal. English boxing has no secrets from me. I sympathize with you for the
insult you have received, but I can’t permit you to raise your hand
against a woman in public. If you prefer to meet me—as would be more
fitting to your rank—in some other manner, of course you understand me,
captain.”
</p>

<p>
But the young officer had recovered himself, and was no longer listening. At
this moment Rogojin appeared, elbowing through the crowd; he took
Nastasia’s hand, drew it through his arm, and quickly led her away. He
appeared to be terribly excited; he was trembling all over, and was as pale as
a corpse. As he carried Nastasia off, he turned and grinned horribly in the
officer’s face, and with low malice observed:
</p>

<p>
“Tfu! look what the fellow got! Look at the blood on his cheek! Ha,
ha!”
</p>

<p>
Recollecting himself, however, and seeing at a glance the sort of people he had
to deal with, the officer turned his back on both his opponents, and
courteously, but concealing his face with his handkerchief, approached the
prince, who was now rising from the chair into which he had fallen.
</p>

<p>
“Prince Muishkin, I believe? The gentleman to whom I had the honour of
being introduced?”
</p>

<p>
“She is mad, insane—I assure you, she is mad,” replied the
prince in trembling tones, holding out both his hands mechanically towards the
officer.
</p>

<p>
“I cannot boast of any such knowledge, of course, but I wished to know
your name.”
</p>

<p>
He bowed and retired without waiting for an answer.
</p>

<p>
Five seconds after the disappearance of the last actor in this scene, the
police arrived. The whole episode had not lasted more than a couple of minutes.
Some of the spectators had risen from their places, and departed altogether;
some merely exchanged their seats for others a little further off; some were
delighted with the occurrence, and talked and laughed over it for a long time.
</p>

<p>
In a word, the incident closed as such incidents do, and the band began to play
again. The prince walked away after the Epanchin party. Had he thought of
looking round to the left after he had been pushed so unceremoniously into the
chair, he would have observed Aglaya standing some twenty yards away. She had
stayed to watch the scandalous scene in spite of her mother’s and
sisters’ anxious cries to her to come away.
</p>

<p>
Prince S. ran up to her and persuaded her, at last, to come home with them.
</p>

<p>
Lizabetha Prokofievna saw that she returned in such a state of agitation that
it was doubtful whether she had even heard their calls. But only a couple of
minutes later, when they had reached the park, Aglaya suddenly remarked, in her
usual calm, indifferent voice:
</p>

<p>
“I wanted to see how the farce would end.”
</p>

<h3>III.</h3>

<p>
The occurrence at the Vauxhall had filled both mother and daughters with
something like horror. In their excitement Lizabetha Prokofievna and the girls
were nearly running all the way home.
</p>

<p>
In her opinion there was so much disclosed and laid bare by the episode, that,
in spite of the chaotic condition of her mind, she was able to feel more or
less decided on certain points which, up to now, had been in a cloudy
condition.
</p>

<p>
However, one and all of the party realized that something important had
happened, and that, perhaps fortunately enough, something which had hitherto
been enveloped in the obscurity of guess-work had now begun to come forth a
little from the mists. In spite of Prince S.‘s assurances and
explanations, Evgenie Pavlovitch’s real character and position were at
last coming to light. He was publicly convicted of intimacy with “that
creature.” So thought Lizabetha Prokofievna and her two elder daughters.
</p>

<p>
But the real upshot of the business was that the number of riddles to be solved
was augmented. The two girls, though rather irritated at their mother’s
exaggerated alarm and haste to depart from the scene, had been unwilling to
worry her at first with questions.
</p>

<p>
Besides, they could not help thinking that their sister Aglaya probably knew
more about the whole matter than both they and their mother put together.
</p>

<p>
Prince S. looked as black as night, and was silent and moody. Mrs. Epanchin did
not say a word to him all the way home, and he did not seem to observe the
fact. Adelaida tried to pump him a little by asking, “who was the uncle
they were talking about, and what was it that had happened in
Petersburg?” But he had merely muttered something disconnected about
“making inquiries,” and that “of course it was all
nonsense.” “Oh, of course,” replied Adelaida, and asked no
more questions. Aglaya, too, was very quiet; and the only remark she made on
the way home was that they were “walking much too fast to be
pleasant.”
</p>

<p>
Once she turned and observed the prince hurrying after them. Noticing his
anxiety to catch them up, she smiled ironically, and then looked back no more.
At length, just as they neared the house, General Epanchin came out and met
them; he had only just arrived from town.
</p>

<p>
His first word was to inquire after Evgenie Pavlovitch. But Lizabetha stalked
past him, and neither looked at him nor answered his question.
</p>

<p>
He immediately judged from the faces of his daughters and Prince S. that there
was a thunderstorm brewing, and he himself already bore evidences of unusual
perturbation of mind.
</p>

<p>
He immediately button-holed Prince S., and standing at the front door, engaged
in a whispered conversation with him. By the troubled aspect of both of them,
when they entered the house, and approached Mrs. Epanchin, it was evident that
they had been discussing very disturbing news.
</p>

<p>
Little by little the family gathered together upstairs in Lizabetha
Prokofievna’s apartments, and Prince Muishkin found himself alone on the
verandah when he arrived. He settled himself in a corner and sat waiting,
though he knew not what he expected. It never struck him that he had better go
away, with all this disturbance in the house. He seemed to have forgotten all
the world, and to be ready to sit on where he was for years on end. From
upstairs he caught sounds of excited conversation every now and then.
</p>

<p>
He could not say how long he sat there. It grew late and became quite dark.
</p>

<p>
Suddenly Aglaya entered the verandah. She seemed to be quite calm, though a
little pale.
</p>

<p>
Observing the prince, whom she evidently did not expect to see there, alone in
the corner, she smiled, and approached him:
</p>

<p>
“What are you doing there?” she asked.
</p>

<p>
The prince muttered something, blushed, and jumped up; but Aglaya immediately
sat down beside him; so he reseated himself.
</p>

<p>
She looked suddenly, but attentively into his face, then at the window, as
though thinking of something else, and then again at him.
</p>

<p>
“Perhaps she wants to laugh at me,” thought the prince, “but
no; for if she did she certainly would do so.”
</p>

<p>
“Would you like some tea? I’ll order some,” she said, after a
minute or two of silence.
</p>

<p>
“N-no thanks, I don’t know—”
</p>

<p>
“Don’t know! How can you not know? By-the-by, look here—if
someone were to challenge you to a duel, what should you do? I wished to ask
you this—some time ago—”
</p>

<p>
“Why? Nobody would ever challenge me to a duel!”
</p>

<p>
“But if they were to, would you be dreadfully frightened?”
</p>

<p>
“I dare say I should be—much alarmed!”
</p>

<p>
“Seriously? Then are you a coward?”
</p>

<p>
“N-no!—I don’t think so. A coward is a man who is afraid and
runs away; the man who is frightened but does not run away, is not quite a
coward,” said the prince with a smile, after a moment’s thought.
</p>

<p>
“And you wouldn’t run away?”
</p>

<p>
“No—I don’t think I should run away,” replied the
prince, laughing outright at last at Aglaya’s questions.
</p>

<p>
“Though I am a woman, I should certainly not run away for
anything,” said Aglaya, in a slightly pained voice. “However, I see
you are laughing at me and twisting your face up as usual in order to make
yourself look more interesting. Now tell me, they generally shoot at twenty
paces, don’t they? At ten, sometimes? I suppose if at ten they must be
either wounded or killed, mustn’t they?”
</p>

<p>
“I don’t think they often kill each other at duels.”
</p>

<p>
“They killed Pushkin that way.”
</p>

<p>
“That may have been an accident.”
</p>

<p>
“Not a bit of it; it was a duel to the death, and he was killed.”
</p>

<p>
“The bullet struck so low down that probably his antagonist would never
have aimed at that part of him—people never do; he would have aimed at
his chest or head; so that probably the bullet hit him accidentally. I have
been told this by competent authorities.”
</p>

<p>
“Well, a soldier once told me that they were always ordered to aim at the
middle of the body. So you see they don’t aim at the chest or head; they
aim lower on purpose. I asked some officer about this afterwards, and he said
it was perfectly true.”
</p>

<p>
“That is probably when they fire from a long distance.”
</p>

<p>
“Can you shoot at all?”
</p>

<p>
“No, I have never shot in my life.”
</p>

<p>
“Can’t you even load a pistol?”
</p>

<p>
“No! That is, I understand how it’s done, of course, but I have
never done it.”
</p>

<p>
“Then, you don’t know how, for it is a matter that needs practice.
Now listen and learn; in the first place buy good powder, not damp (they say it
mustn’t be at all damp, but very dry), some fine kind it is—you
must ask for <i>pistol</i> powder, not the stuff they load cannons with. They
say one makes the bullets oneself, somehow or other. Have you got a
pistol?”
</p>

<p>
“No—and I don’t want one,” said the prince, laughing.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, what <i>nonsense!</i> You must buy one. French or English are the
best, they say. Then take a little powder, about a thimbleful, or perhaps two,
and pour it into the barrel. Better put plenty. Then push in a bit of felt (it
<i>must</i> be felt, for some reason or other); you can easily get a bit off
some old mattress, or off a door; it’s used to keep the cold out. Well,
when you have pushed the felt down, put the bullet in; do you hear now? The
bullet last and the powder first, not the other way, or the pistol won’t
shoot. What are you laughing at? I wish you to buy a pistol and practise every
day, and you must learn to hit a mark for <i>certain</i>; will you?”
</p>

<p>
The prince only laughed. Aglaya stamped her foot with annoyance.
</p>

<p>
Her serious air, however, during this conversation had surprised him
considerably. He had a feeling that he ought to be asking her something, that
there was something he wanted to find out far more important than how to load a
pistol; but his thoughts had all scattered, and he was only aware that she was
sitting by him, and talking to him, and that he was looking at her; as to what
she happened to be saying to him, that did not matter in the least.
</p>

<p>
The general now appeared on the verandah, coming from upstairs. He was on his
way out, with an expression of determination on his face, and of preoccupation
and worry also.
</p>

<p>
“Ah! Lef Nicolaievitch, it’s you, is it? Where are you off to
now?” he asked, oblivious of the fact that the prince had not showed the
least sign of moving. “Come along with me; I want to say a word or two to
you.”
</p>

<p>
“<i>Au revoir</i>, then!” said Aglaya, holding out her hand to the
prince.
</p>

<p>
It was quite dark now, and Muishkin could not see her face clearly, but a
minute or two later, when he and the general had left the villa, he suddenly
flushed up, and squeezed his right hand tightly.
</p>

<p>
It appeared that he and the general were going in the same direction. In spite
of the lateness of the hour, the general was hurrying away to talk to someone
upon some important subject. Meanwhile he talked incessantly but disconnectedly
to the prince, and continually brought in the name of Lizabetha Prokofievna.
</p>

<p>
If the prince had been in a condition to pay more attention to what the general
was saying, he would have discovered that the latter was desirous of drawing
some information out of him, or indeed of asking him some question outright;
but that he could not make up his mind to come to the point.
</p>

<p>
Muishkin was so absent, that from the very first he could not attend to a word
the other was saying; and when the general suddenly stopped before him with
some excited question, he was obliged to confess, ignominiously, that he did
not know in the least what he had been talking about.
</p>

<p>
The general shrugged his shoulders.
</p>

<p>
“How strange everyone, yourself included, has become of late,” said
he. “I was telling you that I cannot in the least understand Lizabetha
Prokofievna’s ideas and agitations. She is in hysterics up there, and
moans and says that we have been ‘shamed and disgraced.’ How? Why?
When? By whom? I confess that I am very much to blame myself; I do not conceal
the fact; but the conduct, the outrageous behaviour of this woman, must really
be kept within limits, by the police if necessary, and I am just on my way now
to talk the question over and make some arrangements. It can all be managed
quietly and gently, even kindly, and without the slightest fuss or scandal. I
foresee that the future is pregnant with events, and that there is much that
needs explanation. There is intrigue in the wind; but if on one side nothing is
known, on the other side nothing will be explained. If I have heard nothing
about it, nor have <i>you</i>, nor <i>he</i>, nor <i>she</i>—who
<i>has</i> heard about it, I should like to know? How <i>can</i> all this be
explained except by the fact that half of it is mirage or moonshine, or some
hallucination of that sort?”
</p>

<p>
“<i>She</i> is insane,” muttered the prince, suddenly recollecting
all that had passed, with a spasm of pain at his heart.
</p>

<p>
“I too had that idea, and I slept in peace. But now I see that their
opinion is more correct. I do not believe in the theory of madness! The woman
has no common sense; but she is not only not insane, she is artful to a degree.
Her outburst of this evening about Evgenie’s uncle proves that
conclusively. It was <i>villainous</i>, simply jesuitical, and it was all for
some special purpose.”
</p>

<p>
“What about Evgenie’s uncle?”
</p>

<p>
“My goodness, Lef Nicolaievitch, why, you can’t have heard a single
word I said! Look at me, I’m still trembling all over with the dreadful
shock! It is that that kept me in town so late. Evgenie Pavlovitch’s
uncle—”
</p>

<p>
“Well?” cried the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Shot himself this morning, at seven o’clock. A respected, eminent
old man of seventy; and exactly point for point as she described it; a sum of
money, a considerable sum of government money, missing!”
</p>

<p>
“Why, how could she—”
</p>

<p>
“What, know of it? Ha, ha, ha! Why, there was a whole crowd round her the
moment she appeared on the scenes here. You know what sort of people surround
her nowadays, and solicit the honour of her ‘acquaintance.’ Of
course she might easily have heard the news from someone coming from town. All
Petersburg, if not all Pavlofsk, knows it by now. Look at the slyness of her
observation about Evgenie’s uniform! I mean, her remark that he had
retired just in time! There’s a venomous hint for you, if you like! No,
no! there’s no insanity there! Of course I refuse to believe that Evgenie
Pavlovitch could have known beforehand of the catastrophe; that is, that at
such and such a day at seven o’clock, and all that; but he might well
have had a presentiment of the truth. And I—all of us—Prince S. and
everybody, believed that he was to inherit a large fortune from this uncle.
It’s dreadful, horrible! Mind, I don’t suspect Evgenie of anything,
be quite clear on that point; but the thing is a little suspicious,
nevertheless. Prince S. can’t get over it. Altogether it is a very
extraordinary combination of circumstances.”
</p>

<p>
“What suspicion attaches to Evgenie Pavlovitch?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, none at all! He has behaved very well indeed. I didn’t mean to
drop any sort of hint. His own fortune is intact, I believe. Lizabetha
Prokofievna, of course, refuses to listen to anything. That’s the worst
of it all, these family catastrophes or quarrels, or whatever you like to call
them. You know, prince, you are a friend of the family, so I don’t mind
telling you; it now appears that Evgenie Pavlovitch proposed to Aglaya a month
ago, and was refused.”
</p>

<p>
“Impossible!” cried the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Why? Do you know anything about it? Look here,” continued the
general, more agitated than ever, and trembling with excitement, “maybe I
have been letting the cat out of the bag too freely with you, if so, it is
because you are—that sort of man, you know! Perhaps you have some special
information?”
</p>

<p>
“I know nothing about Evgenie Pavlovitch!” said the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Nor do I! They always try to bury me underground when there’s
anything going on; they don’t seem to reflect that it is unpleasant to a
man to be treated so! I won’t stand it! We have just had a terrible
scene!—mind, I speak to you as I would to my own son! Aglaya laughs at
her mother. Her sisters guessed about Evgenie having proposed and been
rejected, and told Lizabetha.
</p>

<p>
“I tell you, my dear fellow, Aglaya is such an extraordinary, such a
self-willed, fantastical little creature, you wouldn’t believe it! Every
high quality, every brilliant trait of heart and mind, are to be found in her,
and, with it all, so much caprice and mockery, such wild fancies—indeed,
a little devil! She has just been laughing at her mother to her very face, and
at her sisters, and at Prince S., and everybody—and of course she always
laughs at me! You know I love the child—I love her even when she laughs
at me, and I believe the wild little creature has a special fondness for me for
that very reason. She is fonder of me than any of the others. I dare swear she
has had a good laugh at <i>you</i> before now! You were having a quiet talk
just now, I observed, after all the thunder and lightning upstairs. She was
sitting with you just as though there had been no row at all.”
</p>

<p>
The prince blushed painfully in the darkness, and closed his right hand
tightly, but he said nothing.
</p>

<p>
“My dear good Prince Lef Nicolaievitch,” began the general again,
suddenly, “both I and Lizabetha Prokofievna—(who has begun to
respect you once more, and me through you, goodness knows why!)—we both
love you very sincerely, and esteem you, in spite of any appearances to the
contrary. But you’ll admit what a riddle it must have been for us when
that calm, cold, little spitfire, Aglaya—(for she stood up to her mother
and answered her questions with inexpressible contempt, and mine still more so,
because, like a fool, I thought it my duty to assert myself as head of the
family)—when Aglaya stood up of a sudden and informed us that ‘that
madwoman’ (strangely enough, she used exactly the same expression as you
did) ‘has taken it into her head to marry me to Prince Lef Nicolaievitch,
and therefore is doing her best to choke Evgenie Pavlovitch off, and rid the
house of him.’ That’s what she said. She would not give the
slightest explanation; she burst out laughing, banged the door, and went away.
We all stood there with our mouths open. Well, I was told afterwards of your
little passage with Aglaya this afternoon, and—and—dear
prince—you are a good, sensible fellow, don’t be angry if I speak
out—she is laughing at you, my boy! She is enjoying herself like a child,
at your expense, and therefore, since she is a child, don’t be angry with
her, and don’t think anything of it. I assure you, she is simply making a
fool of you, just as she does with one and all of us out of pure lack of
something better to do. Well—good-bye! You know our feelings, don’t
you—our sincere feelings for yourself? They are unalterable, you know,
dear boy, under all circumstances, but—Well, here we part; I must go down
to the right. Rarely have I sat so uncomfortably in my saddle, as they say, as
I now sit. And people talk of the charms of a country holiday!”
</p>

<p>
Left to himself at the cross-roads, the prince glanced around him, quickly
crossed the road towards the lighted window of a neighbouring house, and
unfolded a tiny scrap of paper which he had held clasped in his right hand
during the whole of his conversation with the general.
</p>

<p>
He read the note in the uncertain rays that fell from the window. It was as
follows:
</p>

<p>
“Tomorrow morning, I shall be at the green bench in the park at seven,
and shall wait there for you. I have made up my mind to speak to you about a
most important matter which closely concerns yourself.
</p>

<p>
“P.S.—I trust that you will not show this note to anyone. Though I
am ashamed of giving you such instructions, I feel that I must do so,
considering what you are. I therefore write the words, and blush for your
simple character.
</p>

<p>
“P.P.S.—It is the same green bench that I showed you before. There!
aren’t you ashamed of yourself? I felt that it was necessary to repeat
even that information.”
</p>

<p>
The note was written and folded anyhow, evidently in a great hurry, and
probably just before Aglaya had come down to the verandah.
</p>

<p>
In inexpressible agitation, amounting almost to fear, the prince slipped
quickly away from the window, away from the light, like a frightened thief, but
as he did so he collided violently with some gentleman who seemed to spring
from the earth at his feet.
</p>

<p>
“I was watching for you, prince,” said the individual.
</p>

<p>
“Is that you, Keller?” said the prince, in surprise.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I’ve been looking for you. I waited for you at the
Epanchins’ house, but of course I could not come in. I dogged you from
behind as you walked along with the general. Well, prince, here is Keller,
absolutely at your service—command him!—ready to sacrifice
himself—even to die in case of need.”
</p>

<p>
“But—why?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, why?—Of course you’ll be challenged! That was young
Lieutenant Moloftsoff. I know him, or rather of him; he won’t pass an
insult. He will take no notice of Rogojin and myself, and, therefore, you are
the only one left to account for. You’ll have to pay the piper, prince.
He has been asking about you, and undoubtedly his friend will call on you
tomorrow—perhaps he is at your house already. If you would do me the
honour to have me for a second, prince, I should be happy. That’s why I
have been looking for you now.”
</p>

<p>
“Duel! You’ve come to talk about a duel, too!” The prince
burst out laughing, to the great astonishment of Keller. He laughed
unrestrainedly, and Keller, who had been on pins and needles, and in a fever of
excitement to offer himself as “second,” was very near being
offended.
</p>

<p>
“You caught him by the arms, you know, prince. No man of proper pride can
stand that sort of treatment in public.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, and he gave me a fearful dig in the chest,” cried the prince,
still laughing. “What are we to fight about? I shall beg his pardon,
that’s all. But if we must fight—we’ll fight! Let him have a
shot at me, by all means; I should rather like it. Ha, ha, ha! I know how to
load a pistol now; do you know how to load a pistol, Keller? First, you have to
buy the powder, you know; it mustn’t be wet, and it mustn’t be that
coarse stuff that they load cannons with—it must be pistol powder. Then
you pour the powder in, and get hold of a bit of felt from some door, and then
shove the bullet in. But don’t shove the bullet in before the powder,
because the thing wouldn’t go off—do you hear, Keller, the thing
wouldn’t go off! Ha, ha, ha! Isn’t that a grand reason, Keller, my
friend, eh? Do you know, my dear fellow, I really must kiss you, and embrace
you, this very moment. Ha, ha! How was it you so suddenly popped up in front of
me as you did? Come to my house as soon as you can, and we’ll have some
champagne. We’ll all get drunk! Do you know I have a dozen of champagne
in Lebedeff’s cellar? Lebedeff sold them to me the day after I arrived. I
took the lot. We’ll invite everybody! Are you going to do any sleeping
tonight?”
</p>

<p>
“As much as usual, prince—why?”
</p>

<p>
“Pleasant dreams then—ha, ha!”
</p>

<p>
The prince crossed the road, and disappeared into the park, leaving the
astonished Keller in a state of ludicrous wonder. He had never before seen the
prince in such a strange condition of mind, and could not have imagined the
possibility of it.
</p>

<p>
“Fever, probably,” he said to himself, “for the man is all
nerves, and this business has been a little too much for him. He is not
<i>afraid</i>, that’s clear; that sort never funks! H’m! champagne!
That was an interesting item of news, at all events!—Twelve bottles! Dear
me, that’s a very respectable little stock indeed! I bet anything
Lebedeff lent somebody money on deposit of this dozen of champagne. Hum!
he’s a nice fellow, is this prince! I like this sort of man. Well, I
needn’t be wasting time here, and if it’s a case of champagne,
why—there’s no time like the present!”
</p>

<p>
That the prince was almost in a fever was no more than the truth. He wandered
about the park for a long while, and at last came to himself in a lonely
avenue. He was vaguely conscious that he had already paced this particular
walk—from that large, dark tree to the bench at the other end—about
a hundred yards altogether—at least thirty times backwards and forwards.
</p>

<p>
As to recollecting what he had been thinking of all that time, he could not. He
caught himself, however, indulging in one thought which made him roar with
laughter, though there was nothing really to laugh at in it; but he felt that
he must laugh, and go on laughing.
</p>

<p>
It struck him that the idea of the duel might not have occurred to Keller
alone, but that his lesson in the art of pistol-loading might have been not
altogether accidental! “Pooh! nonsense!” he said to himself, struck
by another thought, of a sudden. “Why, she was immensely surprised to
find me there on the verandah, and laughed and talked about <i>tea!</i> And yet
she had this little note in her hand, therefore she must have known that I was
sitting there. So why was she surprised? Ha, ha, ha!”
</p>

<p>
He pulled the note out and kissed it; then paused and reflected. “How
strange it all is! how strange!” he muttered, melancholy enough now. In
moments of great joy, he invariably felt a sensation of melancholy come over
him—he could not tell why.
</p>

<p>
He looked intently around him, and wondered why he had come here; he was very
tired, so he approached the bench and sat down on it. Around him was profound
silence; the music in the Vauxhall was over. The park seemed quite empty,
though it was not, in reality, later than half-past eleven. It was a quiet,
warm, clear night—a real Petersburg night of early June; but in the dense
avenue, where he was sitting, it was almost pitch dark.
</p>

<p>
If anyone had come up at this moment and told him that he was in love,
passionately in love, he would have rejected the idea with astonishment, and,
perhaps, with irritation. And if anyone had added that Aglaya’s note was
a love-letter, and that it contained an appointment to a lover’s
rendezvous, he would have blushed with shame for the speaker, and, probably,
have challenged him to a duel.
</p>

<p>
All this would have been perfectly sincere on his part. He had never for a
moment entertained the idea of the possibility of this girl loving him, or even
of such a thing as himself falling in love with her. The possibility of being
loved himself, “a man like me,” as he put it, he ranked among
ridiculous suppositions. It appeared to him that it was simply a joke on
Aglaya’s part, if there really were anything in it at all; but that
seemed to him quite natural. His preoccupation was caused by something
different.
</p>

<p>
As to the few words which the general had let slip about Aglaya laughing at
everybody, and at himself most of all—he entirely believed them. He did
not feel the slightest sensation of offence; on the contrary, he was quite
certain that it was as it should be.
</p>

<p>
His whole thoughts were now as to next morning early; he would see her; he
would sit by her on that little green bench, and listen to how pistols were
loaded, and look at her. He wanted nothing more.
</p>

<p>
The question as to what she might have to say of special interest to himself
occurred to him once or twice. He did not doubt, for a moment, that she really
had some such subject of conversation in store, but so very little interested
in the matter was he that it did not strike him to wonder what it could be. The
crunch of gravel on the path suddenly caused him to raise his head.
</p>

<p>
A man, whose face it was difficult to see in the gloom, approached the bench,
and sat down beside him. The prince peered into his face, and recognized the
livid features of Rogojin.
</p>

<p>
“I knew you’d be wandering about somewhere here. I didn’t
have to look for you very long,” muttered the latter between his teeth.
</p>

<p>
It was the first time they had met since the encounter on the staircase at the
hotel.
</p>

<p>
Painfully surprised as he was at this sudden apparition of Rogojin, the prince,
for some little while, was unable to collect his thoughts. Rogojin, evidently,
saw and understood the impression he had made; and though he seemed more or
less confused at first, yet he began talking with what looked like assumed ease
and freedom. However, the prince soon changed his mind on this score, and
thought that there was not only no affectation of indifference, but that
Rogojin was not even particularly agitated. If there were a little apparent
awkwardness, it was only in his words and gestures. The man could not change
his heart.
</p>

<p>
“How did you—find me here?” asked the prince for the sake of
saying something.
</p>

<p>
“Keller told me (I found him at your place) that you were in the park.
‘Of course he is!’ I thought.”
</p>

<p>
“Why so?” asked the prince uneasily.
</p>

<p>
Rogojin smiled, but did not explain.
</p>

<p>
“I received your letter, Lef Nicolaievitch—what’s the good of
all that?—It’s no use, you know. I’ve come to you from
<i>her</i>,—she bade me tell you that she must see you, she has something
to say to you. She told me to find you today.”
</p>

<p>
“I’ll come tomorrow. Now I’m going home—are you coming
to my house?”
</p>

<p>
“Why should I? I’ve given you the message.—Goodbye!”
</p>

<p>
“Won’t you come?” asked the prince in a gentle voice.
</p>

<p>
“What an extraordinary man you are! I wonder at you!” Rogojin
laughed sarcastically.
</p>

<p>
“Why do you hate me so?” asked the prince, sadly. “You know
yourself that all you suspected is quite unfounded. I felt you were still angry
with me, though. Do you know why? Because you tried to kill
me—that’s why you can’t shake off your wrath against me. I
tell you that I only remember the Parfen Rogojin with whom I exchanged crosses,
and vowed brotherhood. I wrote you this in yesterday’s letter, in order
that you might forget all that madness on your part, and that you might not
feel called to talk about it when we met. Why do you avoid me? Why do you hold
your hand back from me? I tell you again, I consider all that has passed a
delirium, an insane dream. I can understand all you did, and all you felt that
day, as if it were myself. What you were then imagining was not the case, and
could never be the case. Why, then, should there be anger between us?”
</p>

<p>
“You don’t know what anger is!” laughed Rogojin, in reply to
the prince’s heated words.
</p>

<p>
He had moved a pace or two away, and was hiding his hands behind him.
</p>

<p>
“No, it is impossible for me to come to your house again,” he added
slowly.
</p>

<p>
“Why? Do you hate me so much as all that?”
</p>

<p>
“I don’t love you, Lef Nicolaievitch, and, therefore, what would be
the use of my coming to see you? You are just like a child—you want a
plaything, and it must be taken out and given you—and then you
don’t know how to work it. You are simply repeating all you said in your
letter, and what’s the use? Of course I believe every word you say, and I
know perfectly well that you neither did or ever can deceive me in any way, and
yet, I don’t love you. You write that you’ve forgotten everything,
and only remember your brother Parfen, with whom you exchanged crosses, and
that you don’t remember anything about the Rogojin who aimed a knife at
your throat. What do you know about my feelings, eh?” (Rogojin laughed
disagreeably.) “Here you are holding out your brotherly forgiveness to me
for a thing that I have perhaps never repented of in the slightest degree. I
did not think of it again all that evening; all my thoughts were centred on
something else—”
</p>

<p>
“Not think of it again? Of course you didn’t!” cried the
prince. “And I dare swear that you came straight away down here to
Pavlofsk to listen to the music and dog her about in the crowd, and stare at
her, just as you did today. There’s nothing surprising in that! If you
hadn’t been in that condition of mind that you could think of nothing but
one subject, you would, probably, never have raised your knife against me. I
had a presentiment of what you would do, that day, ever since I saw you first
in the morning. Do you know yourself what you looked like? I knew you would try
to murder me even at the very moment when we exchanged crosses. What did you
take me to your mother for? Did you think to stay your hand by doing so?
Perhaps you did not put your thoughts into words, but you and I were thinking
the same thing, or feeling the same thing looming over us, at the same moment.
What should you think of me now if you had not raised your knife to
me—the knife which God averted from my throat? I would have been guilty
of suspecting you all the same—and you would have intended the murder all
the same; therefore we should have been mutually guilty in any case. Come,
don’t frown; you needn’t laugh at me, either. You say you
haven’t ‘repented.’ Repented! You probably couldn’t, if
you were to try; you dislike me too much for that. Why, if I were an angel of
light, and as innocent before you as a babe, you would still loathe me if you
believed that <i>she</i> loved me, instead of loving yourself. That’s
jealousy—that is the real jealousy.
</p>

<p>
“But do you know what I have been thinking out during this last week,
Parfen? I’ll tell you. What if she loves you now better than anyone? And
what if she torments you <i>because</i> she loves you, and in proportion to her
love for you, so she torments you the more? She won’t tell you this, of
course; you must have eyes to see. Why do you suppose she consents to marry
you? She must have a reason, and that reason she will tell you some day. Some
women desire the kind of love you give her, and she is probably one of these.
Your love and your wild nature impress her. Do you know that a woman is capable
of driving a man crazy almost, with her cruelties and mockeries, and feels not
one single pang of regret, because she looks at him and says to herself,
‘There! I’ll torment this man nearly into his grave, and then, oh!
how I’ll compensate him for it all with my love!’”
</p>

<p>
Rogojin listened to the end, and then burst out laughing:
</p>

<p>
“Why, prince, I declare you must have had a taste of this sort of thing
yourself—haven’t you? I have heard tell of something of the kind,
you know; is it true?”
</p>

<p>
“What? What can you have heard?” said the prince, stammering.
</p>

<p>
Rogojin continued to laugh loudly. He had listened to the prince’s speech
with curiosity and some satisfaction. The speaker’s impulsive warmth had
surprised and even comforted him.
</p>

<p>
“Why, I’ve not only heard of it; I see it for myself,” he
said. “When have you ever spoken like that before? It wasn’t like
yourself, prince. Why, if I hadn’t heard this report about you, I should
never have come all this way into the park—at midnight, too!”
</p>

<p>
“I don’t understand you in the least, Parfen.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, <i>she</i> told me all about it long ago, and tonight I saw for
myself. I saw you at the music, you know, and whom you were sitting with. She
swore to me yesterday, and again today, that you are madly in love with Aglaya
Ivanovna. But that’s all the same to me, prince, and it’s not my
affair at all; for if you have ceased to love <i>her</i>, <i>she</i> has not
ceased to love <i>you</i>. You know, of course, that she wants to marry you to
that girl? She’s sworn to it! Ha, ha! She says to me, ‘Until then I
won’t marry you. When they go to church, we’ll go too—and not
before.’ What on earth does she mean by it? I don’t know, and I
never did. Either she loves you without limits or—yet, if she loves you,
why does she wish to marry you to another girl? She says, ‘I want to see
him happy,’ which is to say—she loves you.”
</p>

<p>
“I wrote, and I say to you once more, that she is not in her right
mind,” said the prince, who had listened with anguish to what Rogojin
said.
</p>

<p>
“Goodness knows—you may be wrong there! At all events, she named
the day this evening, as we left the gardens. ‘In three weeks,’
says she, ‘and perhaps sooner, we shall be married.’ She swore to
it, took off her cross and kissed it. So it all depends upon you now, prince,
You see! Ha, ha!”
</p>

<p>
“That’s all madness. What you say about me, Parfen, never can and
never will be. Tomorrow, I shall come and see you—”
</p>

<p>
“How can she be mad,” Rogojin interrupted, “when she is sane
enough for other people and only mad for you? How can she write letters to
<i>her</i>, if she’s mad? If she were insane they would observe it in her
letters.”
</p>

<p>
“What letters?” said the prince, alarmed.
</p>

<p>
“She writes to <i>her</i>—and the girl reads the letters.
Haven’t you heard?—You are sure to hear; she’s sure to show
you the letters herself.”
</p>

<p>
“I won’t believe this!” cried the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Why, prince, you’ve only gone a few steps along this road, I
perceive. You are evidently a mere beginner. Wait a bit! Before long,
you’ll have your own detectives, you’ll watch day and night, and
you’ll know every little thing that goes on there—that is,
if—”
</p>

<p>
“Drop that subject, Rogojin, and never mention it again. And listen: as I
have sat here, and talked, and listened, it has suddenly struck me that
tomorrow is my birthday. It must be about twelve o’clock, now; come home
with me—do, and we’ll see the day in! We’ll have some wine,
and you shall wish me—I don’t know what—but you, especially
you, must wish me a good wish, and I shall wish you full happiness in return.
Otherwise, hand me my cross back again. You didn’t return it to me next
day. Haven’t you got it on now?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I have,” said Rogojin.
</p>

<p>
“Come along, then. I don’t wish to meet my new year without
you—my new life, I should say, for a new life is beginning for me. Did
you know, Parfen, that a new life had begun for me?”
</p>

<p>
“I see for myself that it is so—and I shall tell <i>her</i>. But
you are not quite yourself, Lef Nicolaievitch.”
</p>

<h3>IV.</h3>

<p>
The prince observed with great surprise, as he approached his villa,
accompanied by Rogojin, that a large number of people were assembled on his
verandah, which was brilliantly lighted up. The company seemed merry and were
noisily laughing and talking—even quarrelling, to judge from the sounds.
At all events they were clearly enjoying themselves, and the prince observed
further on closer investigation—that all had been drinking champagne. To
judge from the lively condition of some of the party, it was to be supposed
that a considerable quantity of champagne had been consumed already.
</p>

<p>
All the guests were known to the prince; but the curious part of the matter was
that they had all arrived on the same evening, as though with one accord,
although he had only himself recollected the fact that it was his birthday a
few moments since.
</p>

<p>
“You must have told somebody you were going to trot out the champagne,
and that’s why they are all come!” muttered Rogojin, as the two
entered the verandah. “We know all about that! You’ve only to
whistle and they come up in shoals!” he continued, almost angrily. He was
doubtless thinking of his own late experiences with his boon companions.
</p>

<p>
All surrounded the prince with exclamations of welcome, and, on hearing that it
was his birthday, with cries of congratulation and delight; many of them were
very noisy.
</p>

<p>
The presence of certain of those in the room surprised the prince vastly, but
the guest whose advent filled him with the greatest wonder—almost
amounting to alarm—was Evgenie Pavlovitch. The prince could not believe
his eyes when he beheld the latter, and could not help thinking that something
was wrong.
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff ran up promptly to explain the arrival of all these gentlemen. He was
himself somewhat intoxicated, but the prince gathered from his long-winded
periods that the party had assembled quite naturally, and accidentally.
</p>

<p>
First of all Hippolyte had arrived, early in the evening, and feeling decidedly
better, had determined to await the prince on the verandah. There Lebedeff had
joined him, and his household had followed—that is, his daughters and
General Ivolgin. Burdovsky had brought Hippolyte, and stayed on with him. Gania
and Ptitsin had dropped in accidentally later on; then came Keller, and he and
Colia insisted on having champagne. Evgenie Pavlovitch had only dropped in half
an hour or so ago. Lebedeff had served the champagne readily.
</p>

<p>
“My own though, prince, my own, mind,” he said, “and
there’ll be some supper later on; my daughter is getting it ready now.
Come and sit down, prince, we are all waiting for you, we want you with us.
Fancy what we have been discussing! You know the question, ‘to be or not
to be,’—out of Hamlet! A contemporary theme! Quite up-to-date! Mr.
Hippolyte has been eloquent to a degree. He won’t go to bed, but he has
only drunk a little champagne, and that can’t do him any harm. Come
along, prince, and settle the question. Everyone is waiting for you, sighing
for the light of your luminous intelligence...”
</p>

<p>
The prince noticed the sweet, welcoming look on Vera Lebedeff’s face, as
she made her way towards him through the crowd. He held out his hand to her.
She took it, blushing with delight, and wished him “a happy life from
that day forward.” Then she ran off to the kitchen, where her presence
was necessary to help in the preparations for supper. Before the prince’s
arrival she had spent some time on the terrace, listening eagerly to the
conversation, though the visitors, mostly under the influence of wine, were
discussing abstract subjects far beyond her comprehension. In the next room her
younger sister lay on a wooden chest, sound asleep, with her mouth wide open;
but the boy, Lebedeff’s son, had taken up his position close beside Colia
and Hippolyte, his face lit up with interest in the conversation of his father
and the rest, to which he would willingly have listened for ten hours at a
stretch.
</p>

<p>
“I have waited for you on purpose, and am very glad to see you arrive so
happy,” said Hippolyte, when the prince came forward to press his hand,
immediately after greeting Vera.
</p>

<p>
“And how do you know that I am ‘so happy’?”
</p>

<p>
“I can see it by your face! Say ‘how do you do’ to the
others, and come and sit down here, quick—I’ve been waiting for
you!” he added, accentuating the fact that he had waited. On the
prince’s asking, “Will it not be injurious to you to sit out so
late?” he replied that he could not believe that he had thought himself
dying three days or so ago, for he never had felt better than this evening.
</p>

<p>
Burdovsky next jumped up and explained that he had come in by accident, having
escorted Hippolyte from town. He murmured that he was glad he had
“written nonsense” in his letter, and then pressed the
prince’s hand warmly and sat down again.
</p>

<p>
The prince approached Evgenie Pavlovitch last of all. The latter immediately
took his arm.
</p>

<p>
“I have a couple of words to say to you,” he began, “and
those on a very important matter; let’s go aside for a minute or
two.”
</p>

<p>
“Just a couple of words!” whispered another voice in the
prince’s other ear, and another hand took his other arm. Muishkin turned,
and to his great surprise observed a red, flushed face and a droll-looking
figure which he recognized at once as that of Ferdishenko. Goodness knows where
he had turned up from!
</p>

<p>
“Do you remember Ferdishenko?” he asked.
</p>

<p>
“Where have you dropped from?” cried the prince.
</p>

<p>
“He is sorry for his sins now, prince,” cried Keller. “He did
not want to let you know he was here; he was hidden over there in the
corner,—but he repents now, he feels his guilt.”
</p>

<p>
“Why, what has he done?”
</p>

<p>
“I met him outside and brought him in—he’s a gentleman who
doesn’t often allow his friends to see him, of late—but he’s
sorry now.”
</p>

<p>
“Delighted, I’m sure!—I’ll come back directly,
gentlemen,—sit down there with the others, please,—excuse me one
moment,” said the host, getting away with difficulty in order to follow
Evgenie.
</p>

<p>
“You are very gay here,” began the latter, “and I have had
quite a pleasant half-hour while I waited for you. Now then, my dear Lef
Nicolaievitch, this is what’s the matter. I’ve arranged it all with
Moloftsoff, and have just come in to relieve your mind on that score. You need
be under no apprehensions. He was very sensible, as he should be, of course,
for I think he was entirely to blame himself.”
</p>

<p>
“What Moloftsoff?”
</p>

<p>
“The young fellow whose arms you held, don’t you know? He was so
wild with you that he was going to send a friend to you tomorrow
morning.”
</p>

<p>
“What nonsense!”
</p>

<p>
“Of course it is nonsense, and in nonsense it would have ended,
doubtless; but you know these fellows, they—”
</p>

<p>
“Excuse me, but I think you must have something else that you wished to
speak about, Evgenie Pavlovitch?”
</p>

<p>
“Of course, I have!” said the other, laughing. “You see, my
dear fellow, tomorrow, very early in the morning, I must be off to town about
this unfortunate business (my uncle, you know!). Just imagine, my dear sir, it
is all true—word for word—and, of course, everybody knew it
excepting myself. All this has been such a blow to me that I have not managed
to call in at the Epanchins’. Tomorrow I shall not see them either,
because I shall be in town. I may not be here for three days or more; in a
word, my affairs are a little out of gear. But though my town business is, of
course, most pressing, still I determined not to go away until I had seen you,
and had a clear understanding with you upon certain points; and that without
loss of time. I will wait now, if you will allow me, until the company departs;
I may just as well, for I have nowhere else to go to, and I shall certainly not
do any sleeping tonight; I’m far too excited. And finally, I must confess
that, though I know it is bad form to pursue a man in this way, I have come to
beg your friendship, my dear prince. You are an unusual sort of a person; you
don’t lie at every step, as some men do; in fact, you don’t lie at
all, and there is a matter in which I need a true and sincere friend, for I
really may claim to be among the number of bona fide unfortunates just
now.”
</p>

<p>
He laughed again.
</p>

<p>
“But the trouble is,” said the prince, after a slight pause for
reflection, “that goodness only knows when this party will break up.
Hadn’t we better stroll into the park? I’ll excuse myself,
there’s no danger of their going away.”
</p>

<p>
“No, no! I have my reasons for wishing them not to suspect us of being
engaged in any specially important conversation. There are gentry present who
are a little too much interested in us. You are not aware of that perhaps,
prince? It will be a great deal better if they see that we are friendly just in
an ordinary way. They’ll all go in a couple of hours, and then I’ll
ask you to give me twenty minutes—half an hour at most.”
</p>

<p>
“By all means! I assure you I am delighted—you need not have
entered into all these explanations. As for your remarks about friendship with
me—thanks, very much indeed. You must excuse my being a little absent
this evening. Do you know, I cannot somehow be attentive to anything just
now?”
</p>

<p>
“I see, I see,” said Evgenie, smiling gently. His mirth seemed very
near the surface this evening.
</p>

<p>
“What do you see?” said the prince, startled.
</p>

<p>
“I don’t want you to suspect that I have simply come here to
deceive you and pump information out of you!” said Evgenie, still
smiling, and without making any direct reply to the question.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, but I haven’t the slightest doubt that you did come to pump
me,” said the prince, laughing himself, at last; “and I dare say
you are quite prepared to deceive me too, so far as that goes. But what of
that? I’m not afraid of you; besides, you’ll hardly believe it, I
feel as though I really didn’t care a scrap one way or the other, just
now!—And—and—and as you are a capital fellow, I am convinced
of that, I dare say we really shall end by being good friends. I like you very
much Evgenie Pavlovitch; I consider you a very good fellow indeed.”
</p>

<p>
“Well, in any case, you are a most delightful man to have to deal with,
be the business what it may,” concluded Evgenie. “Come along now,
I’ll drink a glass to your health. I’m charmed to have entered into
alliance with you. By-the-by,” he added suddenly, “has this young
Hippolyte come down to stay with you?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes.”
</p>

<p>
“He’s not going to die at once, I should think, is he?”
</p>

<p>
“Why?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, I don’t know. I’ve been half an hour here with him, and
he—”
</p>

<p>
Hippolyte had been waiting for the prince all this time, and had never ceased
looking at him and Evgenie Pavlovitch as they conversed in the corner. He
became much excited when they approached the table once more. He was disturbed
in his mind, it seemed; perspiration stood in large drops on his forehead; in
his gleaming eyes it was easy to read impatience and agitation; his gaze
wandered from face to face of those present, and from object to object in the
room, apparently without aim. He had taken a part, and an animated one, in the
noisy conversation of the company; but his animation was clearly the outcome of
fever. His talk was almost incoherent; he would break off in the middle of a
sentence which he had begun with great interest, and forget what he had been
saying. The prince discovered to his dismay that Hippolyte had been allowed to
drink two large glasses of champagne; the one now standing by him being the
third. All this he found out afterwards; at the moment he did not notice
anything, very particularly.
</p>

<p>
“Do you know I am specially glad that today is your birthday!”
cried Hippolyte.
</p>

<p>
“Why?”
</p>

<p>
“You’ll soon see. D’you know I had a feeling that there would
be a lot of people here tonight? It’s not the first time that my
presentiments have been fulfilled. I wish I had known it was your birthday,
I’d have brought you a present—perhaps I have got a present for
you! Who knows? Ha, ha! How long is it now before daylight?”
</p>

<p>
“Not a couple of hours,” said Ptitsin, looking at his watch.
“What’s the good of daylight now? One can read all night in the
open air without it,” said someone.
</p>

<p>
“The good of it! Well, I want just to see a ray of the sun,” said
Hippolyte. “Can one drink to the sun’s health, do you think,
prince?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, I dare say one can; but you had better be calm and lie down,
Hippolyte—that’s much more important.”
</p>

<p>
“You are always preaching about resting; you are a regular nurse to me,
prince. As soon as the sun begins to ‘resound’ in the
sky—what poet said that? ‘The sun resounded in the sky.’ It
is beautiful, though there’s no sense in it!—then we will go to
bed. Lebedeff, tell me, is the sun the source of life? What does the source, or
‘spring,’ of life really mean in the Apocalypse? You have heard of
the ‘Star that is called Wormwood,’ prince?”
</p>

<p>
“I have heard that Lebedeff explains it as the railroads that cover
Europe like a net.”
</p>

<p>
Everybody laughed, and Lebedeff got up abruptly.
</p>

<p>
“No! Allow me, that is not what we are discussing!” he cried,
waving his hand to impose silence. “Allow me! With these gentlemen... all
these gentlemen,” he added, suddenly addressing the prince, “on
certain points... that is...” He thumped the table repeatedly, and the
laughter increased. Lebedeff was in his usual evening condition, and had just
ended a long and scientific argument, which had left him excited and irritable.
On such occasions he was apt to evince a supreme contempt for his opponents.
</p>

<p>
“It is not right! Half an hour ago, prince, it was agreed among us that
no one should interrupt, no one should laugh, that each person was to express
his thoughts freely; and then at the end, when everyone had spoken, objections
might be made, even by the atheists. We chose the general as president. Now
without some such rule and order, anyone might be shouted down, even in the
loftiest and most profound thought....”
</p>

<p>
“Go on! Go on! Nobody is going to interrupt you!” cried several
voices.
</p>

<p>
“Speak, but keep to the point!”
</p>

<p>
“What is this ‘star’?” asked another.
</p>

<p>
“I have no idea,” replied General Ivolgin, who presided with much
gravity.
</p>

<p>
“I love these arguments, prince,” said Keller, also more than half
intoxicated, moving restlessly in his chair. “Scientific and
political.” Then, turning suddenly towards Evgenie Pavlovitch, who was
seated near him: “Do you know, I simply adore reading the accounts of the
debates in the English parliament. Not that the discussions themselves interest
me; I am not a politician, you know; but it delights me to see how they address
each other ‘the noble lord who agrees with me,’ ‘my
honourable opponent who astonished Europe with his proposal,’ ‘the
noble viscount sitting opposite’—all these expressions, all this
parliamentarism of a free people, has an enormous attraction for me. It
fascinates me, prince. I have always been an artist in the depths of my soul, I
assure you, Evgenie Pavlovitch.”
</p>

<p>
“Do you mean to say,” cried Gania, from the other corner, “do
you mean to say that railways are accursed inventions, that they are a source
of ruin to humanity, a poison poured upon the earth to corrupt the springs of
life?”
</p>

<p>
Gavrila Ardalionovitch was in high spirits that evening, and it seemed to the
prince that his gaiety was mingled with triumph. Of course he was only joking
with Lebedeff, meaning to egg him on, but he grew excited himself at the same
time.
</p>

<p>
“Not the railways, oh dear, no!” replied Lebedeff, with a mixture
of violent anger and extreme enjoyment. “Considered alone, the railways
will not pollute the springs of life, but as a whole they are accursed. The
whole tendency of our latest centuries, in its scientific and materialistic
aspect, is most probably accursed.”
</p>

<p>
“Is it certainly accursed?... or do you only mean it might be? That is an
important point,” said Evgenie Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
“It is accursed, certainly accursed!” replied the clerk,
vehemently.
</p>

<p>
“Don’t go so fast, Lebedeff; you are much milder in the
morning,” said Ptitsin, smiling.
</p>

<p>
“But, on the other hand, more frank in the evening! In the evening
sincere and frank,” repeated Lebedeff, earnestly. “More candid,
more exact, more honest, more honourable, and... although I may show you my
weak side, I challenge you all; you atheists, for instance! How are you going
to save the world? How find a straight road of progress, you men of science, of
industry, of cooperation, of trades unions, and all the rest? How are you going
to save it, I say? By what? By credit? What is credit? To what will credit lead
you?”
</p>

<p>
“You are too inquisitive,” remarked Evgenie Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
“Well, anyone who does not interest himself in questions such as this is,
in my opinion, a mere fashionable dummy.”
</p>

<p>
“But it will lead at least to solidarity, and balance of
interests,” said Ptitsin.
</p>

<p>
“You will reach that with nothing to help you but credit? Without
recourse to any moral principle, having for your foundation only individual
selfishness, and the satisfaction of material desires? Universal peace, and the
happiness of mankind as a whole, being the result! Is it really so that I may
understand you, sir?”
</p>

<p>
“But the universal necessity of living, of drinking, of eating—in
short, the whole scientific conviction that this necessity can only be
satisfied by universal co-operation and the solidarity of interests—is,
it seems to me, a strong enough idea to serve as a basis, so to speak, and a
‘spring of life,’ for humanity in future centuries,” said
Gavrila Ardalionovitch, now thoroughly roused.
</p>

<p>
“The necessity of eating and drinking, that is to say, solely the
instinct of self-preservation...”
</p>

<p>
“Is not that enough? The instinct of self-preservation is the normal law
of humanity...”
</p>

<p>
“Who told you that?” broke in Evgenie Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
“It is a law, doubtless, but a law neither more nor less normal than that
of destruction, even self-destruction. Is it possible that the whole normal law
of humanity is contained in this sentiment of self-preservation?”
</p>

<p>
“Ah!” cried Hippolyte, turning towards Evgenie Pavlovitch, and
looking at him with a queer sort of curiosity.
</p>

<p>
Then seeing that Radomski was laughing, he began to laugh himself, nudged
Colia, who was sitting beside him, with his elbow, and again asked what time it
was. He even pulled Colia’s silver watch out of his hand, and looked at
it eagerly. Then, as if he had forgotten everything, he stretched himself out
on the sofa, put his hands behind his head, and looked up at the sky. After a
minute or two he got up and came back to the table to listen to
Lebedeff’s outpourings, as the latter passionately commentated on Evgenie
Pavlovitch’s paradox.
</p>

<p>
“That is an artful and traitorous idea. A smart notion,”
vociferated the clerk, “thrown out as an apple of discord. But it is
just. You are a scoffer, a man of the world, a cavalry officer, and, though not
without brains, you do not realize how profound is your thought, nor how true.
Yes, the laws of self-preservation and of self-destruction are equally powerful
in this world. The devil will hold his empire over humanity until a limit of
time which is still unknown. You laugh? You do not believe in the devil?
Scepticism as to the devil is a French idea, and it is also a frivolous idea.
Do you know who the devil is? Do you know his name? Although you don’t
know his name you make a mockery of his form, following the example of
Voltaire. You sneer at his hoofs, at his tail, at his horns—all of them
the produce of your imagination! In reality the devil is a great and terrible
spirit, with neither hoofs, nor tail, nor horns; it is you who have endowed him
with these attributes! But... he is not the question just now!”
</p>

<p>
“How do you know he is not the question now?” cried Hippolyte,
laughing hysterically.
</p>

<p>
“Another excellent idea, and worth considering!” replied Lebedeff.
“But, again, that is not the question. The question at this moment is
whether we have not weakened ‘the springs of life’ by the
extension...”
</p>

<p>
“Of railways?” put in Colia eagerly.
</p>

<p>
“Not railways, properly speaking, presumptuous youth, but the general
tendency of which railways may be considered as the outward expression and
symbol. We hurry and push and hustle, for the good of humanity! ‘The
world is becoming too noisy, too commercial!’ groans some solitary
thinker. ‘Undoubtedly it is, but the noise of waggons bearing bread to
starving humanity is of more value than tranquillity of soul,’ replies
another triumphantly, and passes on with an air of pride. As for me, I
don’t believe in these waggons bringing bread to humanity. For, founded
on no moral principle, these may well, even in the act of carrying bread to
humanity, coldly exclude a considerable portion of humanity from enjoying it;
that has been seen more than once.”
</p>

<p>
“What, these waggons may coldly exclude?” repeated someone.
</p>

<p>
“That has been seen already,” continued Lebedeff, not deigning to
notice the interruption. “Malthus was a friend of humanity, but, with
ill-founded moral principles, the friend of humanity is the devourer of
humanity, without mentioning his pride; for, touch the vanity of one of these
numberless philanthropists, and to avenge his self-esteem, he will be ready at
once to set fire to the whole globe; and to tell the truth, we are all more or
less like that. I, perhaps, might be the first to set a light to the fuel, and
then run away. But, again, I must repeat, that is not the question.”
</p>

<p>
“What is it then, for goodness’ sake?”
</p>

<p>
“He is boring us!”
</p>

<p>
“The question is connected with the following anecdote of past times; for
I am obliged to relate a story. In our times, and in our country, which I hope
you love as much as I do, for as far as I am concerned, I am ready to shed the
last drop of my blood...
</p>

<p>
“Go on! Go on!”
</p>

<p>
“In our dear country, as indeed in the whole of Europe, a famine visits
humanity about four times a century, as far as I can remember; once in every
twenty-five years. I won’t swear to this being the exact figure, but
anyhow they have become comparatively rare.”
</p>

<p>
“Comparatively to what?”
</p>

<p>
“To the twelfth century, and those immediately preceding and following
it. We are told by historians that widespread famines occurred in those days
every two or three years, and such was the condition of things that men
actually had recourse to cannibalism, in secret, of course. One of these
cannibals, who had reached a good age, declared of his own free will that
during the course of his long and miserable life he had personally killed and
eaten, in the most profound secrecy, sixty monks, not to mention several
children; the number of the latter he thought was about six, an insignificant
total when compared with the enormous mass of ecclesiastics consumed by him. As
to adults, laymen that is to say, he had never touched them.”
</p>

<p>
The president joined in the general outcry.
</p>

<p>
“That’s impossible!” said he in an aggrieved tone. “I
am often discussing subjects of this nature with him, gentlemen, but for the
most part he talks nonsense enough to make one deaf: this story has no pretence
of being true.”
</p>

<p>
“General, remember the siege of Kars! And you, gentlemen, I assure you my
anecdote is the naked truth. I may remark that reality, although it is governed
by invariable law, has at times a resemblance to falsehood. In fact, the truer
a thing is the less true it sounds.”
</p>

<p>
“But could anyone possibly eat sixty monks?” objected the scoffing
listeners.
</p>

<p>
“It is quite clear that he did not eat them all at once, but in a space
of fifteen or twenty years: from that point of view the thing is comprehensible
and natural...”
</p>

<p>
“Natural?”
</p>

<p>
“And natural,” repeated Lebedeff with pedantic obstinacy.
“Besides, a Catholic monk is by nature excessively curious; it would be
quite easy therefore to entice him into a wood, or some secret place, on false
pretences, and there to deal with him as said. But I do not dispute in the
least that the number of persons consumed appears to denote a spice of
greediness.”
</p>

<p>
“It is perhaps true, gentlemen,” said the prince, quietly. He had
been listening in silence up to that moment without taking part in the
conversation, but laughing heartily with the others from time to time.
Evidently he was delighted to see that everybody was amused, that everybody was
talking at once, and even that everybody was drinking. It seemed as if he were
not intending to speak at all, when suddenly he intervened in such a serious
voice that everyone looked at him with interest.
</p>

<p>
“It is true that there were frequent famines at that time, gentlemen. I
have often heard of them, though I do not know much history. But it seems to me
that it must have been so. When I was in Switzerland I used to look with
astonishment at the many ruins of feudal castles perched on the top of steep
and rocky heights, half a mile at least above sea-level, so that to reach them
one had to climb many miles of stony tracks. A castle, as you know, is, a kind
of mountain of stones—a dreadful, almost an impossible, labour! Doubtless
the builders were all poor men, vassals, and had to pay heavy taxes, and to
keep up the priesthood. How, then, could they provide for themselves, and when
had they time to plough and sow their fields? The greater number must,
literally, have died of starvation. I have sometimes asked myself how it was
that these communities were not utterly swept off the face of the earth, and
how they could possibly survive. Lebedeff is not mistaken, in my opinion, when
he says that there were cannibals in those days, perhaps in considerable
numbers; but I do not understand why he should have dragged in the monks, nor
what he means by that.”
</p>

<p>
“It is undoubtedly because, in the twelfth century, monks were the only
people one could eat; they were the fat, among many lean,” said Gavrila
Ardalionovitch.
</p>

<p>
“A brilliant idea, and most true!” cried Lebedeff, “for he
never even touched the laity. Sixty monks, and not a single layman! It is a
terrible idea, but it is historic, it is statistic; it is indeed one of those
facts which enables an intelligent historian to reconstruct the physiognomy of
a special epoch, for it brings out this further point with mathematical
accuracy, that the clergy were in those days sixty times richer and more
flourishing than the rest of humanity and perhaps sixty times fatter
also...”
</p>

<p>
“You are exaggerating, you are exaggerating, Lebedeff!” cried his
hearers, amid laughter.
</p>

<p>
“I admit that it is an historic thought, but what is your
conclusion?” asked the prince.
</p>

<p>
He spoke so seriously in addressing Lebedeff, that his tone contrasted quite
comically with that of the others. They were very nearly laughing at him, too,
but he did not notice it.
</p>

<p>
“Don’t you see he is a lunatic, prince?” whispered Evgenie
Pavlovitch in his ear. “Someone told me just now that he is a bit touched
on the subject of lawyers, that he has a mania for making speeches and intends
to pass the examinations. I am expecting a splendid burlesque now.”
</p>

<p>
“My conclusion is vast,” replied Lebedeff, in a voice like thunder.
“Let us examine first the psychological and legal position of the
criminal. We see that in spite of the difficulty of finding other food, the
accused, or, as we may say, my client, has often during his peculiar life
exhibited signs of repentance, and of wishing to give up this clerical diet.
Incontrovertible facts prove this assertion. He has eaten five or six children,
a relatively insignificant number, no doubt, but remarkable enough from another
point of view. It is manifest that, pricked by remorse—for my client is
religious, in his way, and has a conscience, as I shall prove later—and
desiring to extenuate his sin as far as possible, he has tried six times at
least to substitute lay nourishment for clerical. That this was merely an
experiment we can hardly doubt: for if it had been only a question of
gastronomic variety, six would have been too few; why only six? Why not thirty?
But if we regard it as an experiment, inspired by the fear of committing new
sacrilege, then this number six becomes intelligible. Six attempts to calm his
remorse, and the pricking of his conscience, would amply suffice, for these
attempts could scarcely have been happy ones. In my humble opinion, a child is
too small; I should say, not sufficient; which would result in four or five
times more lay children than monks being required in a given time. The sin,
lessened on the one hand, would therefore be increased on the other, in
quantity, not in quality. Please understand, gentlemen, that in reasoning thus,
I am taking the point of view which might have been taken by a criminal of the
middle ages. As for myself, a man of the late nineteenth century, I, of course,
should reason differently; I say so plainly, and therefore you need not jeer at
me nor mock me, gentlemen. As for you, general, it is still more unbecoming on
your part. In the second place, and giving my own personal opinion, a
child’s flesh is not a satisfying diet; it is too insipid, too sweet; and
the criminal, in making these experiments, could have satisfied neither his
conscience nor his appetite. I am about to conclude, gentlemen; and my
conclusion contains a reply to one of the most important questions of that day
and of our own! This criminal ended at last by denouncing himself to the
clergy, and giving himself up to justice. We cannot but ask, remembering the
penal system of that day, and the tortures that awaited him—the wheel,
the stake, the fire!—we cannot but ask, I repeat, what induced him to
accuse himself of this crime? Why did he not simply stop short at the number
sixty, and keep his secret until his last breath? Why could he not simply leave
the monks alone, and go into the desert to repent? Or why not become a monk
himself? That is where the puzzle comes in! There must have been something
stronger than the stake or the fire, or even than the habits of twenty years!
There must have been an idea more powerful than all the calamities and sorrows
of this world, famine or torture, leprosy or plague—an idea which entered
into the heart, directed and enlarged the springs of life, and made even that
hell supportable to humanity! Show me a force, a power like that, in this our
century of vices and railways! I might say, perhaps, in our century of
steamboats and railways, but I repeat in our century of vices and railways,
because I am drunk but truthful! Show me a single idea which unites men
nowadays with half the strength that it had in those centuries, and dare to
maintain that the ‘springs of life’ have not been polluted and
weakened beneath this ‘star,’ beneath this network in which men are
entangled! Don’t talk to me about your prosperity, your riches, the
rarity of famine, the rapidity of the means of transport! There is more of
riches, but less of force. The idea uniting heart and soul to heart and soul
exists no more. All is loose, soft, limp—we are all of us limp....
Enough, gentlemen! I have done. That is not the question. No, the question is
now, excellency, I believe, to sit down to the banquet you are about to provide
for us!”
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff had roused great indignation in some of his auditors (it should be
remarked that the bottles were constantly uncorked during his speech); but this
unexpected conclusion calmed even the most turbulent spirits.
“That’s how a clever barrister makes a good point!” said he,
when speaking of his peroration later on. The visitors began to laugh and
chatter once again; the committee left their seats, and stretched their legs on
the terrace. Keller alone was still disgusted with Lebedeff and his speech; he
turned from one to another, saying in a loud voice:
</p>

<p>
“He attacks education, he boasts of the fanaticism of the twelfth
century, he makes absurd grimaces, and added to that he is by no means the
innocent he makes himself out to be. How did he get the money to buy this
house, allow me to ask?”
</p>

<p>
In another corner was the general, holding forth to a group of hearers, among
them Ptitsin, whom he had buttonholed. “I have known,” said he,
“a real interpreter of the Apocalypse, the late Gregory Semeonovitch
Burmistroff, and he—he pierced the heart like a fiery flash! He began by
putting on his spectacles, then he opened a large black book; his white beard,
and his two medals on his breast, recalling acts of charity, all added to his
impressiveness. He began in a stern voice, and before him generals, hard men of
the world, bowed down, and ladies fell to the ground fainting. But this one
here—he ends by announcing a banquet! That is not the real thing!”
</p>

<p>
Ptitsin listened and smiled, then turned as if to get his hat; but if he had
intended to leave, he changed his mind. Before the others had risen from the
table, Gania had suddenly left off drinking, and pushed away his glass, a dark
shadow seemed to come over his face. When they all rose, he went and sat down
by Rogojin. It might have been believed that quite friendly relations existed
between them. Rogojin, who had also seemed on the point of going away now sat
motionless, his head bent, seeming to have forgotten his intention. He had
drunk no wine, and appeared absorbed in reflection. From time to time he raised
his eyes, and examined everyone present; one might have imagined that he was
expecting something very important to himself, and that he had decided to wait
for it. The prince had taken two or three glasses of champagne, and seemed
cheerful. As he rose he noticed Evgenie Pavlovitch, and, remembering the
appointment he had made with him, smiled pleasantly. Evgenie Pavlovitch made a
sign with his head towards Hippolyte, whom he was attentively watching. The
invalid was fast asleep, stretched out on the sofa.
</p>

<p>
“Tell me, prince, why on earth did this boy intrude himself upon
you?” he asked, with such annoyance and irritation in his voice that the
prince was quite surprised. “I wouldn’t mind laying odds that he is
up to some mischief.”
</p>

<p>
“I have observed,” said the prince, “that he seems to be an
object of very singular interest to you, Evgenie Pavlovitch. Why is it?”
</p>

<p>
“You may add that I have surely enough to think of, on my own account,
without him; and therefore it is all the more surprising that I cannot tear my
eyes and thoughts away from his detestable physiognomy.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, come! He has a handsome face.”
</p>

<p>
“Why, look at him—look at him now!”
</p>

<p>
The prince glanced again at Evgenie Pavlovitch with considerable surprise.
</p>

<h3>V.</h3>

<p>
Hippolyte, who had fallen asleep during Lebedeff’s discourse, now
suddenly woke up, just as though someone had jogged him in the side. He
shuddered, raised himself on his arm, gazed around, and grew very pale. A look
almost of terror crossed his face as he recollected.
</p>

<p>
“What! are they all off? Is it all over? Is the sun up?” He
trembled, and caught at the prince’s hand. “What time is it? Tell
me, quick, for goodness’ sake! How long have I slept?” he added,
almost in despair, just as though he had overslept something upon which his
whole fate depended.
</p>

<p>
“You have slept seven or perhaps eight minutes,” said Evgenie
Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
Hippolyte gazed eagerly at the latter, and mused for a few moments.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, is that all?” he said at last. “Then I—”
</p>

<p>
He drew a long, deep breath of relief, as it seemed. He realized that all was
not over as yet, that the sun had not risen, and that the guests had merely
gone to supper. He smiled, and two hectic spots appeared on his cheeks.
</p>

<p>
“So you counted the minutes while I slept, did you, Evgenie
Pavlovitch?” he said, ironically. “You have not taken your eyes off
me all the evening—I have noticed that much, you see! Ah, Rogojin!
I’ve just been dreaming about him, prince,” he added, frowning.
“Yes, by the by,” starting up, “where’s the orator?
Where’s Lebedeff? Has he finished? What did he talk about? Is it true,
prince, that you once declared that ‘beauty would save the world’?
Great Heaven! The prince says that beauty saves the world! And I declare that
he only has such playful ideas because he’s in love! Gentlemen, the
prince is in love. I guessed it the moment he came in. Don’t blush,
prince; you make me sorry for you. What beauty saves the world? Colia told me
that you are a zealous Christian; is it so? Colia says you call yourself a
Christian.”
</p>

<p>
The prince regarded him attentively, but said nothing.
</p>

<p>
“You don’t answer me; perhaps you think I am very fond of
you?” added Hippolyte, as though the words had been drawn from him.
</p>

<p>
“No, I don’t think that. I know you don’t love me.”
</p>

<p>
“What, after yesterday? Wasn’t I honest with you?”
</p>

<p>
“I knew yesterday that you didn’t love me.”
</p>

<p>
“Why so? why so? Because I envy you, eh? You always think that, I know.
But do you know why I am saying all this? Look here! I must have some more
champagne—pour me out some, Keller, will you?”
</p>

<p>
“No, you’re not to drink any more, Hippolyte. I won’t let
you.” The prince moved the glass away.
</p>

<p>
“Well perhaps you’re right,” said Hippolyte, musing.
“They might say—yet, devil take them! what does it
matter?—prince, what can it matter what people will say of us
<i>then</i>, eh? I believe I’m half asleep. I’ve had such a
dreadful dream—I’ve only just remembered it. Prince, I don’t
wish you such dreams as that, though sure enough, perhaps, I <i>don’t</i>
love you. Why wish a man evil, though you do not love him, eh? Give me your
hand—let me press it sincerely. There—you’ve given me your
hand—you must feel that I <i>do</i> press it sincerely, don’t you?
I don’t think I shall drink any more. What time is it? Never mind, I know
the time. The time has come, at all events. What! they are laying supper over
there, are they? Then this table is free? Capital, gentlemen! I—hem!
these gentlemen are not listening. Prince, I will just read over an article I
have here. Supper is more interesting, of course, but—”
</p>

<p>
Here Hippolyte suddenly, and most unexpectedly, pulled out of his breast-pocket
a large sealed paper. This imposing-looking document he placed upon the table
before him.
</p>

<p>
The effect of this sudden action upon the company was instantaneous. Evgenie
Pavlovitch almost bounded off his chair in excitement. Rogojin drew nearer to
the table with a look on his face as if he knew what was coming. Gania came
nearer too; so did Lebedeff and the others—the paper seemed to be an
object of great interest to the company in general.
</p>

<p>
“What have you got there?” asked the prince, with some anxiety.
</p>

<p>
“At the first glimpse of the rising sun, prince, I will go to bed. I told
you I would, word of honour! You shall see!” cried Hippolyte. “You
think I’m not capable of opening this packet, do you?” He glared
defiantly round at the audience in general.
</p>

<p>
The prince observed that he was trembling all over.
</p>

<p>
“None of us ever thought such a thing!” Muishkin replied for all.
“Why should you suppose it of us? And what are you going to read,
Hippolyte? What is it?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, what is it?” asked others. The packet sealed with red wax
seemed to attract everyone, as though it were a magnet.
</p>

<p>
“I wrote this yesterday, myself, just after I saw you, prince, and told
you I would come down here. I wrote all day and all night, and finished it this
morning early. Afterwards I had a dream.”
</p>

<p>
“Hadn’t we better hear it tomorrow?” asked the prince
timidly.
</p>

<p>
“Tomorrow ‘there will be no more time!’” laughed
Hippolyte, hysterically. “You needn’t be afraid; I shall get
through the whole thing in forty minutes, at most an hour! Look how interested
everybody is! Everybody has drawn near. Look! look at them all staring at my
sealed packet! If I hadn’t sealed it up it wouldn’t have been half
so effective! Ha, ha! that’s mystery, that is! Now then, gentlemen, shall
I break the seal or not? Say the word; it’s a mystery, I tell you—a
secret! Prince, you know who said there would be ‘no more time’? It
was the great and powerful angel in the Apocalypse.”
</p>

<p>
“Better not read it now,” said the prince, putting his hand on the
packet.
</p>

<p>
“No, don’t read it!” cried Evgenie suddenly. He appeared so
strangely disturbed that many of those present could not help wondering.
</p>

<p>
“Reading? None of your reading now!” said somebody;
“it’s supper-time.” “What sort of an article is it? For
a paper? Probably it’s very dull,” said another. But the
prince’s timid gesture had impressed even Hippolyte.
</p>

<p>
“Then I’m not to read it?” he whispered, nervously. “Am
I not to read it?” he repeated, gazing around at each face in turn.
“What are you afraid of, prince?” he turned and asked the latter
suddenly.
</p>

<p>
“What should I be afraid of?”
</p>

<p>
“Has anyone a coin about them? Give me a twenty-copeck piece,
somebody!” And Hippolyte leapt from his chair.
</p>

<p>
“Here you are,” said Lebedeff, handing him one; he thought the boy
had gone mad.
</p>

<p>
“Vera Lukianovna,” said Hippolyte, “toss it, will you? Heads,
I read, tails, I don’t.”
</p>

<p>
Vera Lebedeff tossed the coin into the air and let it fall on the table.
</p>

<p>
It was “heads.”
</p>

<p>
“Then I read it,” said Hippolyte, in the tone of one bowing to the
fiat of destiny. He could not have grown paler if a verdict of death had
suddenly been presented to him.
</p>

<p>
“But after all, what is it? Is it possible that I should have just risked
my fate by tossing up?” he went on, shuddering; and looked round him
again. His eyes had a curious expression of sincerity. “That is an
astonishing psychological fact,” he cried, suddenly addressing the
prince, in a tone of the most intense surprise. “It is... it is something
quite inconceivable, prince,” he repeated with growing animation, like a
man regaining consciousness. “Take note of it, prince, remember it; you
collect, I am told, facts concerning capital punishment... They told me so. Ha,
ha! My God, how absurd!” He sat down on the sofa, put his elbows on the
table, and laid his head on his hands. “It is shameful—though what
does it matter to me if it is shameful?
</p>

<p>
“Gentlemen, gentlemen! I am about to break the seal,” he continued,
with determination. “I—I—of course I don’t insist upon
anyone listening if they do not wish to.”
</p>

<p>
With trembling fingers he broke the seal and drew out several sheets of paper,
smoothed them out before him, and began sorting them.
</p>

<p>
“What on earth does all this mean? What’s he going to read?”
muttered several voices. Others said nothing; but one and all sat down and
watched with curiosity. They began to think something strange might really be
about to happen. Vera stood and trembled behind her father’s chair,
almost in tears with fright; Colia was nearly as much alarmed as she was.
Lebedeff jumped up and put a couple of candles nearer to Hippolyte, so that he
might see better.
</p>

<p>
“Gentlemen, this—you’ll soon see what this is,” began
Hippolyte, and suddenly commenced his reading.
</p>

<p>
“It’s headed, ‘A Necessary Explanation,’ with the
motto, ‘<i>Après moi le déluge!</i>’ Oh, deuce take it all! Surely
I can never have seriously written such a silly motto as that? Look here,
gentlemen, I beg to give notice that all this is very likely terrible nonsense.
It is only a few ideas of mine. If you think that there is anything mysterious
coming—or in a word—”
</p>

<p>
“Better read on without any more beating about the bush,” said
Gania.
</p>

<p>
“Affectation!” remarked someone else.
</p>

<p>
“Too much talk,” said Rogojin, breaking the silence for the first
time.
</p>

<p>
Hippolyte glanced at him suddenly, and when their eyes met Rogojin showed his
teeth in a disagreeable smile, and said the following strange words:
“That’s not the way to settle this business, my friend;
that’s not the way at all.”
</p>

<p>
Of course nobody knew what Rogojin meant by this; but his words made a deep
impression upon all. Everyone seemed to see in a flash the same idea.
</p>

<p>
As for Hippolyte, their effect upon him was astounding. He trembled so that the
prince was obliged to support him, and would certainly have cried out, but that
his voice seemed to have entirely left him for the moment. For a minute or two
he could not speak at all, but panted and stared at Rogojin. At last he managed
to ejaculate:
</p>

<p>
“Then it was <i>you</i> who
came—<i>you</i>—<i>you?</i>”
</p>

<p>
“Came where? What do you mean?” asked Rogojin, amazed. But
Hippolyte, panting and choking with excitement, interrupted him violently.
</p>

<p>
“<i>You</i> came to me last week, in the night, at two o’clock, the
day I was with you in the morning! Confess it was you!”
</p>

<p>
“Last week? In the night? Have you gone cracked, my good friend?”
</p>

<p>
Hippolyte paused and considered a moment. Then a smile of cunning—almost
triumph—crossed his lips.
</p>

<p>
“It was you,” he murmured, almost in a whisper, but with absolute
conviction. “Yes, it was you who came to my room and sat silently on a
chair at my window for a whole hour—more! It was between one and two at
night; you rose and went out at about three. It was you, you! Why you should
have frightened me so, why you should have wished to torment me like that, I
cannot tell—but you it was.”
</p>

<p>
There was absolute hatred in his eyes as he said this, but his look of fear and
his trembling had not left him.
</p>

<p>
“You shall hear all this directly, gentlemen.
I—I—listen!”
</p>

<p>
He seized his paper in a desperate hurry; he fidgeted with it, and tried to
sort it, but for a long while his trembling hands could not collect the sheets
together. “He’s either mad or delirious,” murmured Rogojin.
At last he began.
</p>

<p>
For the first five minutes the reader’s voice continued to tremble, and
he read disconnectedly and unevenly; but gradually his voice strengthened.
Occasionally a violent fit of coughing stopped him, but his animation grew with
the progress of the reading—as did also the disagreeable impression which
it made upon his audience,—until it reached the highest pitch of
excitement.
</p>

<p>
Here is the article.
</p>

<p class="center">
MY NECESSARY EXPLANATION.
</p>

<p>
“<i>Après moi le déluge.</i>
</p>

<p>
“Yesterday morning the prince came to see me. Among other things he asked
me to come down to his villa. I knew he would come and persuade me to this
step, and that he would adduce the argument that it would be easier for me to
die ‘among people and green trees,’—as he expressed it. But
today he did not say ‘die,’ he said ‘live.’ It is
pretty much the same to me, in my position, which he says. When I asked him why
he made such a point of his ‘green trees,’ he told me, to my
astonishment, that he had heard that last time I was in Pavlofsk I had said
that I had come ‘to have a last look at the trees.’
</p>

<p>
“When I observed that it was all the same whether one died among trees or
in front of a blank brick wall, as here, and that it was not worth making any
fuss over a fortnight, he agreed at once. But he insisted that the good air at
Pavlofsk and the greenness would certainly cause a physical change for the
better, and that my excitement, and my <i>dreams</i>, would be perhaps
relieved. I remarked to him, with a smile, that he spoke like a materialist,
and he answered that he had always been one. As he never tells a lie, there
must be something in his words. His smile is a pleasant one. I have had a good
look at him. I don’t know whether I like him or not; and I have no time
to waste over the question. The hatred which I felt for him for five months has
become considerably modified, I may say, during the last month. Who knows,
perhaps I am going to Pavlofsk on purpose to see him! But why do I leave my
chamber? Those who are sentenced to death should not leave their cells. If I
had not formed a final resolve, but had decided to wait until the last minute,
I should not leave my room, or accept his invitation to come and die at
Pavlofsk. I must be quick and finish this explanation before tomorrow. I shall
have no time to read it over and correct it, for I must read it tomorrow to the
prince and two or three witnesses whom I shall probably find there.
</p>

<p>
“As it will be absolutely true, without a touch of falsehood, I am
curious to see what impression it will make upon me myself at the moment when I
read it out. This is my ‘last and solemn’—but why need I call
it that? There is no question about the truth of it, for it is not worthwhile
lying for a fortnight; a fortnight of life is not itself worth having, which is
a proof that I write nothing here but pure truth.
</p>

<p>
(“N.B.—Let me remember to consider; am I mad at this moment, or
not? or rather at these moments? I have been told that consumptives sometimes
do go out of their minds for a while in the last stages of the malady. I can
prove this tomorrow when I read it out, by the impression it makes upon the
audience. I must settle this question once and for all, otherwise I can’t
go on with anything.)
</p>

<p>
“I believe I have just written dreadful nonsense; but there’s no
time for correcting, as I said before. Besides that, I have made myself a
promise not to alter a single word of what I write in this paper, even though I
find that I am contradicting myself every five lines. I wish to verify the
working of the natural logic of my ideas tomorrow during the
reading—whether I am capable of detecting logical errors, and whether all
that I have meditated over during the last six months be true, or nothing but
delirium.
</p>

<p>
“If two months since I had been called upon to leave my room and the view
of Meyer’s wall opposite, I verily believe I should have been sorry. But
now I have no such feeling, and yet I am leaving this room and Meyer’s
brick wall <i>for ever</i>. So that my conclusion, that it is not worth while
indulging in grief, or any other emotion, for a fortnight, has proved stronger
than my very nature, and has taken over the direction of my feelings. But is it
so? Is it the case that my nature is conquered entirely? If I were to be put on
the rack now, I should certainly cry out. I should not say that it is not worth
while to yell and feel pain because I have but a fortnight to live.
</p>

<p>
“But is it true that I have but a fortnight of life left to me? I know I
told some of my friends that Doctor B. had informed me that this was the case;
but I now confess that I lied; B. has not even seen me. However, a week ago, I
called in a medical student, Kislorodoff, who is a Nationalist, an Atheist, and
a Nihilist, by conviction, and that is why I had him. I needed a man who would
tell me the bare truth without any humbug or ceremony—and so he
did—indeed, almost with pleasure (which I thought was going a little too
far).
</p>

<p>
“Well, he plumped out that I had about a month left me; it might be a
little more, he said, under favourable circumstances, but it might also be
considerably less. According to his opinion I might die quite
suddenly—tomorrow, for instance—there had been such cases. Only a
day or two since a young lady at Colomna who suffered from consumption, and was
about on a par with myself in the march of the disease, was going out to market
to buy provisions, when she suddenly felt faint, lay down on the sofa, gasped
once, and died.
</p>

<p>
“Kislorodoff told me all this with a sort of exaggerated devil-may-care
negligence, and as though he did me great honour by talking to me so, because
it showed that he considered me the same sort of exalted Nihilistic being as
himself, to whom death was a matter of no consequence whatever, either way.
</p>

<p>
“At all events, the fact remained—a month of life and no more! That
he is right in his estimation I am absolutely persuaded.
</p>

<p>
“It puzzles me much to think how on earth the prince guessed yesterday
that I have had bad dreams. He said to me, ‘Your excitement and dreams
will find relief at Pavlofsk.’ Why did he say ‘dreams’?
Either he is a doctor, or else he is a man of exceptional intelligence and
wonderful powers of observation. (But that he is an ‘idiot,’ at
bottom there can be no doubt whatever.) It so happened that just before he
arrived I had a delightful little dream; one of a kind that I have hundreds of
just now. I had fallen asleep about an hour before he came in, and dreamed that
I was in some room, not my own. It was a large room, well furnished, with a
cupboard, chest of drawers, sofa, and my bed, a fine wide bed covered with a
silken counterpane. But I observed in the room a dreadful-looking creature, a
sort of monster. It was a little like a scorpion, but was not a scorpion, but
far more horrible, and especially so, because there are no creatures anything
like it in nature, and because it had appeared to me for a purpose, and bore
some mysterious signification. I looked at the beast well; it was brown in
colour and had a shell; it was a crawling kind of reptile, about eight inches
long, and narrowed down from the head, which was about a couple of fingers in
width, to the end of the tail, which came to a fine point. Out of its trunk,
about a couple of inches below its head, came two legs at an angle of
forty-five degrees, each about three inches long, so that the beast looked like
a trident from above. It had eight hard needle-like whiskers coming out from
different parts of its body; it went along like a snake, bending its body about
in spite of the shell it wore, and its motion was very quick and very horrible
to look at. I was dreadfully afraid it would sting me; somebody had told me, I
thought, that it was venomous; but what tormented me most of all was the
wondering and wondering as to who had sent it into my room, and what was the
mystery which I felt it contained.
</p>

<p>
“It hid itself under the cupboard and under the chest of drawers, and
crawled into the corners. I sat on a chair and kept my legs tucked under me.
Then the beast crawled quietly across the room and disappeared somewhere near
my chair. I looked about for it in terror, but I still hoped that as my feet
were safely tucked away it would not be able to touch me.
</p>

<p>
“Suddenly I heard behind me, and about on a level with my head, a sort of
rattling sound. I turned sharp round and saw that the brute had crawled up the
wall as high as the level of my face, and that its horrible tail, which was
moving incredibly fast from side to side, was actually touching my hair! I
jumped up—and it disappeared. I did not dare lie down on my bed for fear
it should creep under my pillow. My mother came into the room, and some friends
of hers. They began to hunt for the reptile and were more composed than I was;
they did not seem to be afraid of it. But they did not understand as I did.
</p>

<p>
“Suddenly the monster reappeared; it crawled slowly across the room and
made for the door, as though with some fixed intention, and with a slow
movement that was more horrible than ever.
</p>

<p>
“Then my mother opened the door and called my dog, Norma. Norma was a
great Newfoundland, and died five years ago.
</p>

<p>
“She sprang forward and stood still in front of the reptile as if she had
been turned to stone. The beast stopped too, but its tail and claws still moved
about. I believe animals are incapable of feeling supernatural fright—if
I have been rightly informed,—but at this moment there appeared to me to
be something more than ordinary about Norma’s terror, as though it must
be supernatural; and as though she felt, just as I did myself, that this
reptile was connected with some mysterious secret, some fatal omen.
</p>

<p>
“Norma backed slowly and carefully away from the brute, which followed
her, creeping deliberately after her as though it intended to make a sudden
dart and sting her.
</p>

<p>
“In spite of Norma’s terror she looked furious, though she trembled
in all her limbs. At length she slowly bared her terrible teeth, opened her
great red jaws, hesitated—took courage, and seized the beast in her
mouth. It seemed to try to dart out of her jaws twice, but Norma caught at it
and half swallowed it as it was escaping. The shell cracked in her teeth; and
the tail and legs stuck out of her mouth and shook about in a horrible manner.
Suddenly Norma gave a piteous whine; the reptile had bitten her tongue. She
opened her mouth wide with the pain, and I saw the beast lying across her
tongue, and out of its body, which was almost bitten in two, came a hideous
white-looking substance, oozing out into Norma’s mouth; it was of the
consistency of a crushed black-beetle. Just then I awoke and the prince entered
the room.”
</p>

<p>
“Gentlemen!” said Hippolyte, breaking off here, “I have not
done yet, but it seems to me that I have written down a great deal here that is
unnecessary,—this dream—”
</p>

<p>
“You have indeed!” said Gania.
</p>

<p>
“There is too much about myself, I know, but—” As Hippolyte
said this his face wore a tired, pained look, and he wiped the sweat off his
brow.
</p>

<p>
“Yes,” said Lebedeff, “you certainly think a great deal too
much about yourself.”
</p>

<p>
“Well—gentlemen—I do not force anyone to listen! If any of
you are unwilling to sit it out, please go away, by all means!”
</p>

<p>
“He turns people out of a house that isn’t his own,” muttered
Rogojin.
</p>

<p>
“Suppose we all go away?” said Ferdishenko suddenly.
</p>

<p>
Hippolyte clutched his manuscript, and gazing at the last speaker with
glittering eyes, said: “You don’t like me at all!” A few
laughed at this, but not all.
</p>

<p>
“Hippolyte,” said the prince, “give me the papers, and go to
bed like a sensible fellow. We’ll have a good talk tomorrow, but you
really mustn’t go on with this reading; it is not good for you!”
</p>

<p>
“How can I? How can I?” cried Hippolyte, looking at him in
amazement. “Gentlemen! I was a fool! I won’t break off again.
Listen, everyone who wants to!”
</p>

<p>
He gulped down some water out of a glass standing near, bent over the table, in
order to hide his face from the audience, and recommenced.
</p>

<p>
“The idea that it is not worth while living for a few weeks took
possession of me a month ago, when I was told that I had four weeks to live,
but only partially so at that time. The idea quite overmastered me three days
since, that evening at Pavlofsk. The first time that I felt really impressed
with this thought was on the terrace at the prince’s, at the very moment
when I had taken it into my head to make a last trial of life. I wanted to see
people and trees (I believe I said so myself), I got excited, I maintained
Burdovsky’s rights, ‘my neighbour!’—I dreamt that one
and all would open their arms, and embrace me, that there would be an
indescribable exchange of forgiveness between us all! In a word, I behaved like
a fool, and then, at that very same instant, I felt my ‘last
conviction.’ I ask myself now how I could have waited six months for that
conviction! I knew that I had a disease that spares no one, and I really had no
illusions; but the more I realized my condition, the more I clung to life; I
wanted to live at any price. I confess I might well have resented that blind,
deaf fate, which, with no apparent reason, seemed to have decided to crush me
like a fly; but why did I not stop at resentment? Why did I begin to live,
knowing that it was not worthwhile to begin? Why did I attempt to do what I
knew to be an impossibility? And yet I could not even read a book to the end; I
had given up reading. What is the good of reading, what is the good of learning
anything, for just six months? That thought has made me throw aside a book more
than once.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, that wall of Meyer’s could tell a tale if it liked. There was
no spot on its dirty surface that I did not know by heart. Accursed wall! and
yet it is dearer to me than all the Pavlofsk trees!—That is—it
<i>would</i> be dearer if it were not all the same to me, now!
</p>

<p>
“I remember now with what hungry interest I began to watch the lives of
other people—interest that I had never felt before! I used to wait for
Colia’s arrival impatiently, for I was so ill myself, then, that I could
not leave the house. I so threw myself into every little detail of news, and
took so much interest in every report and rumour, that I believe I became a
regular gossip! I could not understand, among other things, how all these
people—with so much life in and before them—do not become
<i>rich</i>—and I don’t understand it now. I remember being told of
a poor wretch I once knew, who had died of hunger. I was almost beside myself
with rage! I believe if I could have resuscitated him I would have done so for
the sole purpose of murdering him!
</p>

<p>
“Occasionally I was so much better that I could go out; but the streets
used to put me in such a rage that I would lock myself up for days rather than
go out, even if I were well enough to do so! I could not bear to see all those
preoccupied, anxious-looking creatures continuously surging along the streets
past me! Why are they always anxious? What is the meaning of their eternal care
and worry? It is their wickedness, their perpetual detestable
malice—that’s what it is—they are all full of malice, malice!
</p>

<p>
“Whose fault is it that they are all miserable, that they don’t
know how to live, though they have fifty or sixty years of life before them?
Why did that fool allow himself to die of hunger with sixty years of unlived
life before him?
</p>

<p>
“And everyone of them shows his rags, his toil-worn hands, and yells in
his wrath: ‘Here are we, working like cattle all our lives, and always as
hungry as dogs, and there are others who do not work, and are fat and
rich!’ The eternal refrain! And side by side with them trots along some
wretched fellow who has known better days, doing light porter’s work from
morn to night for a living, always blubbering and saying that ‘his wife
died because he had no money to buy medicine with,’ and his children
dying of cold and hunger, and his eldest daughter gone to the bad, and so on.
Oh! I have no pity and no patience for these fools of people. Why can’t
they be Rothschilds? Whose fault is it that a man has not got millions of money
like Rothschild? If he has life, all this must be in his power! Whose fault is
it that he does not know how to live his life?
</p>

<p>
“Oh! it’s all the same to me now—<i>now!</i> But at that time
I would soak my pillow at night with tears of mortification, and tear at my
blanket in my rage and fury. Oh, how I longed at that time to be turned
out—<i>me</i>, eighteen years old, poor, half-clothed, turned out into
the street, quite alone, without lodging, without work, without a crust of
bread, without relations, without a single acquaintance, in some large
town—hungry, beaten (if you like), but in good health—and
<i>then</i> I would show them—
</p>

<p>
“What would I show them?
</p>

<p>
“Oh, don’t think that I have no sense of my own humiliation! I have
suffered already in reading so far. Which of you all does not think me a fool
at this moment—a young fool who knows nothing of life—forgetting
that to live as I have lived these last six months is to live longer than
grey-haired old men. Well, let them laugh, and say it is all nonsense, if they
please. They may say it is all fairy-tales, if they like; and I have spent
whole nights telling myself fairy-tales. I remember them all. But how can I
tell fairy-tales now? The time for them is over. They amused me when I found
that there was not even time for me to learn the Greek grammar, as I wanted to
do. ‘I shall die before I get to the syntax,’ I thought at the
first page—and threw the book under the table. It is there still, for I
forbade anyone to pick it up.
</p>

<p>
“If this ‘Explanation’ gets into anybody’s hands, and
they have patience to read it through, they may consider me a madman, or a
schoolboy, or, more likely, a man condemned to die, who thought it only natural
to conclude that all men, excepting himself, esteem life far too lightly, live
it far too carelessly and lazily, and are, therefore, one and all, unworthy of
it. Well, I affirm that my reader is wrong again, for my convictions have
nothing to do with my sentence of death. Ask them, ask any one of them, or all
of them, what they mean by happiness! Oh, you may be perfectly sure that if
Columbus was happy, it was not after he had discovered America, but when he was
discovering it! You may be quite sure that he reached the culminating point of
his happiness three days before he saw the New World with his actual eyes, when
his mutinous sailors wanted to tack about, and return to Europe! What did the
New World matter after all? Columbus had hardly seen it when he died, and in
reality he was entirely ignorant of what he had discovered. The important thing
is life—life and nothing else! What is any ‘discovery’
whatever compared with the incessant, eternal discovery of life?
</p>

<p>
“But what is the use of talking? I’m afraid all this is so
commonplace that my confession will be taken for a schoolboy exercise—the
work of some ambitious lad writing in the hope of his work ‘seeing the
light’; or perhaps my readers will say that ‘I had perhaps
something to say, but did not know how to express it.’
</p>

<p>
“Let me add to this that in every idea emanating from genius, or even in
every serious human idea—born in the human brain—there always
remains something—some sediment—which cannot be expressed to
others, though one wrote volumes and lectured upon it for five-and-thirty
years. There is always a something, a remnant, which will never come out from
your brain, but will remain there with you, and you alone, for ever and ever,
and you will die, perhaps, without having imparted what may be the very essence
of your idea to a single living soul.
</p>

<p>
“So that if I cannot now impart all that has tormented me for the last
six months, at all events you will understand that, having reached my
‘last convictions,’ I must have paid a very dear price for them.
That is what I wished, for reasons of my own, to make a point of in this my
‘Explanation.’
</p>

<p>
“But let me resume.”
</p>

<h3>VI.</h3>

<p>
“I will not deceive you. ‘Reality’ got me so entrapped in its
meshes now and again during the past six months, that I forgot my
‘sentence’ (or perhaps I did not wish to think of it), and actually
busied myself with affairs.
</p>

<p>
“A word as to my circumstances. When, eight months since, I became very
ill, I threw up all my old connections and dropped all my old companions. As I
was always a gloomy, morose sort of individual, my friends easily forgot me; of
course, they would have forgotten me all the same, without that excuse. My
position at home was solitary enough. Five months ago I separated myself
entirely from the family, and no one dared enter my room except at stated
times, to clean and tidy it, and so on, and to bring me my meals. My mother
dared not disobey me; she kept the children quiet, for my sake, and beat them
if they dared to make any noise and disturb me. I so often complained of them
that I should think they must be very fond, indeed, of me by this time. I think
I must have tormented ‘my faithful Colia’ (as I called him) a good
deal too. He tormented me of late; I could see that he always bore my tempers
as though he had determined to ‘spare the poor invalid.’ This
annoyed me, naturally. He seemed to have taken it into his head to imitate the
prince in Christian meekness! Surikoff, who lived above us, annoyed me, too. He
was so miserably poor, and I used to prove to him that he had no one to blame
but himself for his poverty. I used to be so angry that I think I frightened
him eventually, for he stopped coming to see me. He was a most meek and humble
fellow, was Surikoff. (N.B.—They say that meekness is a great power. I
must ask the prince about this, for the expression is his.) But I remember one
day in March, when I went up to his lodgings to see whether it was true that
one of his children had been starved and frozen to death, I began to hold forth
to him about his poverty being his own fault, and, in the course of my remarks,
I accidentally smiled at the corpse of his child. Well, the poor wretch’s
lips began to tremble, and he caught me by the shoulder, and pushed me to the
door. ‘Go out,’ he said, in a whisper. I went out, of course, and I
declare I <i>liked</i> it. I liked it at the very moment when I was turned out.
But his words filled me with a strange sort of feeling of disdainful pity for
him whenever I thought of them—a feeling which I did not in the least
desire to entertain. At the very moment of the insult (for I admit that I did
insult him, though I did not mean to), this man could not lose his temper. His
lips had trembled, but I swear it was not with rage. He had taken me by the
arm, and said, ‘Go out,’ without the least anger. There was
dignity, a great deal of dignity, about him, and it was so inconsistent with
the look of him that, I assure you, it was quite comical. But there was no
anger. Perhaps he merely began to despise me at that moment.
</p>

<p>
“Since that time he has always taken off his hat to me on the stairs,
whenever I met him, which is a thing he never did before; but he always gets
away from me as quickly as he can, as though he felt confused. If he did
despise me, he despised me ‘meekly,’ after his own fashion.
</p>

<p>
“I dare say he only took his hat off out of fear, as it were, to the son
of his creditor; for he always owed my mother money. I thought of having an
explanation with him, but I knew that if I did, he would begin to apologize in
a minute or two, so I decided to let him alone.
</p>

<p>
“Just about that time, that is, the middle of March, I suddenly felt very
much better; this continued for a couple of weeks. I used to go out at dusk. I
like the dusk, especially in March, when the night frost begins to harden the
day’s puddles, and the gas is burning.
</p>

<p>
“Well, one night in the Shestilavochnaya, a man passed me with a paper
parcel under his arm. I did not take stock of him very carefully, but he seemed
to be dressed in some shabby summer dust-coat, much too light for the season.
When he was opposite the lamp-post, some ten yards away, I observed something
fall out of his pocket. I hurried forward to pick it up, just in time, for an
old wretch in a long kaftan rushed up too. He did not dispute the matter, but
glanced at what was in my hand and disappeared.
</p>

<p>
“It was a large old-fashioned pocket-book, stuffed full; but I guessed,
at a glance, that it had anything in the world inside it, except money.
</p>

<p>
“The owner was now some forty yards ahead of me, and was very soon lost
in the crowd. I ran after him, and began calling out; but as I knew nothing to
say excepting ‘hey!’ he did not turn round. Suddenly he turned into
the gate of a house to the left; and when I darted in after him, the gateway
was so dark that I could see nothing whatever. It was one of those large houses
built in small tenements, of which there must have been at least a hundred.
</p>

<p>
“When I entered the yard I thought I saw a man going along on the far
side of it; but it was so dark I could not make out his figure.
</p>

<p>
“I crossed to that corner and found a dirty dark staircase. I heard a man
mounting up above me, some way higher than I was, and thinking I should catch
him before his door would be opened to him, I rushed after him. I heard a door
open and shut on the fifth storey, as I panted along; the stairs were narrow,
and the steps innumerable, but at last I reached the door I thought the right
one. Some moments passed before I found the bell and got it to ring.
</p>

<p>
“An old peasant woman opened the door; she was busy lighting the
‘samovar’ in a tiny kitchen. She listened silently to my questions,
did not understand a word, of course, and opened another door leading into a
little bit of a room, low and scarcely furnished at all, but with a large, wide
bed in it, hung with curtains. On this bed lay one Terentich, as the woman
called him, drunk, it appeared to me. On the table was an end of candle in an
iron candlestick, and a half-bottle of vodka, nearly finished. Terentich
muttered something to me, and signed towards the next room. The old woman had
disappeared, so there was nothing for me to do but to open the door indicated.
I did so, and entered the next room.
</p>

<p>
“This was still smaller than the other, so cramped that I could scarcely
turn round; a narrow single bed at one side took up nearly all the room.
Besides the bed there were only three common chairs, and a wretched old
kitchen-table standing before a small sofa. One could hardly squeeze through
between the table and the bed.
</p>

<p>
“On the table, as in the other room, burned a tallow candle-end in an
iron candlestick; and on the bed there whined a baby of scarcely three weeks
old. A pale-looking woman was dressing the child, probably the mother; she
looked as though she had not as yet got over the trouble of childbirth, she
seemed so weak and was so carelessly dressed. Another child, a little girl of
about three years old, lay on the sofa, covered over with what looked like a
man’s old dress-coat.
</p>

<p>
“At the table stood a man in his shirt sleeves; he had thrown off his
coat; it lay upon the bed; and he was unfolding a blue paper parcel in which
were a couple of pounds of bread, and some little sausages.
</p>

<p>
“On the table along with these things were a few old bits of black bread,
and some tea in a pot. From under the bed there protruded an open portmanteau
full of bundles of rags. In a word, the confusion and untidiness of the room
were indescribable.
</p>

<p>
“It appeared to me, at the first glance, that both the man and the woman
were respectable people, but brought to that pitch of poverty where untidiness
seems to get the better of every effort to cope with it, till at last they take
a sort of bitter satisfaction in it. When I entered the room, the man, who had
entered but a moment before me, and was still unpacking his parcels, was saying
something to his wife in an excited manner. The news was apparently bad, as
usual, for the woman began whimpering. The man’s face seemed to me to be
refined and even pleasant. He was dark-complexioned, and about twenty-eight
years of age; he wore black whiskers, and his lip and chin were shaved. He
looked morose, but with a sort of pride of expression. A curious scene
followed.
</p>

<p>
“There are people who find satisfaction in their own touchy feelings,
especially when they have just taken the deepest offence; at such moments they
feel that they would rather be offended than not. These easily-ignited natures,
if they are wise, are always full of remorse afterwards, when they reflect that
they have been ten times as angry as they need have been.
</p>

<p>
“The gentleman before me gazed at me for some seconds in amazement, and
his wife in terror; as though there was something alarmingly extraordinary in
the fact that anyone could come to see them. But suddenly he fell upon me
almost with fury; I had had no time to mutter more than a couple of words; but
he had doubtless observed that I was decently dressed and, therefore, took deep
offence because I had dared enter his den so unceremoniously, and spy out the
squalor and untidiness of it.
</p>

<p>
“Of course he was delighted to get hold of someone upon whom to vent his
rage against things in general.
</p>

<p>
“For a moment I thought he would assault me; he grew so pale that he
looked like a woman about to have hysterics; his wife was dreadfully alarmed.
</p>

<p>
“‘How dare you come in so? Be off!’ he shouted, trembling all
over with rage and scarcely able to articulate the words. Suddenly, however, he
observed his pocketbook in my hand.
</p>

<p>
“‘I think you dropped this,’ I remarked, as quietly and drily
as I could. (I thought it best to treat him so.) For some while he stood before
me in downright terror, and seemed unable to understand. He then suddenly
grabbed at his side-pocket, opened his mouth in alarm, and beat his forehead
with his hand.
</p>

<p>
“‘My God!’ he cried, ‘where did you find it?
How?’ I explained in as few words as I could, and as drily as possible,
how I had seen it and picked it up; how I had run after him, and called out to
him, and how I had followed him upstairs and groped my way to his door.
</p>

<p>
“‘Gracious Heaven!’ he cried, ‘all our papers are in
it! My dear sir, you little know what you have done for us. I should have been
lost—lost!’
</p>

<p>
“I had taken hold of the door-handle meanwhile, intending to leave the
room without reply; but I was panting with my run upstairs, and my exhaustion
came to a climax in a violent fit of coughing, so bad that I could hardly
stand.
</p>

<p>
“I saw how the man dashed about the room to find me an empty chair, how
he kicked the rags off a chair which was covered up by them, brought it to me,
and helped me to sit down; but my cough went on for another three minutes or
so. When I came to myself he was sitting by me on another chair, which he had
also cleared of the rubbish by throwing it all over the floor, and was watching
me intently.
</p>

<p>
“‘I’m afraid you are ill?’ he remarked, in the tone
which doctors use when they address a patient. ‘I am myself a medical
man’ (he did not say ‘doctor’), with which words he waved his
hands towards the room and its contents as though in protest at his present
condition. ‘I see that you—’
</p>

<p>
“‘I’m in consumption,’ I said laconically, rising from
my seat.
</p>

<p>
“He jumped up, too.
</p>

<p>
“‘Perhaps you are exaggerating—if you were to take proper
measures perhaps—”
</p>

<p>
“He was terribly confused and did not seem able to collect his scattered
senses; the pocket-book was still in his left hand.
</p>

<p>
“‘Oh, don’t mind me,’ I said. ‘Dr.
B—— saw me last week’ (I lugged him in again), ‘and my
hash is quite settled; pardon me—’ I took hold of the door-handle
again. I was on the point of opening the door and leaving my grateful but
confused medical friend to himself and his shame, when my damnable cough got
hold of me again.
</p>

<p>
“My doctor insisted on my sitting down again to get my breath. He now
said something to his wife who, without leaving her place, addressed a few
words of gratitude and courtesy to me. She seemed very shy over it, and her
sickly face flushed up with confusion. I remained, but with the air of a man
who knows he is intruding and is anxious to get away. The doctor’s
remorse at last seemed to need a vent, I could see.
</p>

<p>
“‘If I—’ he began, breaking off abruptly every other
moment, and starting another sentence. ‘I—I am so very grateful to
you, and I am so much to blame in your eyes, I feel sure, I—you
see—’ (he pointed to the room again) ‘at this moment I am in
such a position—’
</p>

<p>
“‘Oh!’ I said, ‘there’s nothing to see;
it’s quite a clear case—you’ve lost your post and have come
up to make explanations and get another, if you can!’
</p>

<p>
“‘How do you know that?’ he asked in amazement.
</p>

<p>
“‘Oh, it was evident at the first glance,’ I said ironically,
but not intentionally so. ‘There are lots of people who come up from the
provinces full of hope, and run about town, and have to live as best they
can.’
</p>

<p>
“He began to talk at once excitedly and with trembling lips; he began
complaining and telling me his story. He interested me, I confess; I sat there
nearly an hour. His story was a very ordinary one. He had been a provincial
doctor; he had a civil appointment, and had no sooner taken it up than
intrigues began. Even his wife was dragged into these. He was proud, and flew
into a passion; there was a change of local government which acted in favour of
his opponents; his position was undermined, complaints were made against him;
he lost his post and came up to Petersburg with his last remaining money, in
order to appeal to higher authorities. Of course nobody would listen to him for
a long time; he would come and tell his story one day and be refused promptly;
another day he would be fed on false promises; again he would be treated
harshly; then he would be told to sign some documents; then he would sign the
paper and hand it in, and they would refuse to receive it, and tell him to file
a formal petition. In a word he had been driven about from office to office for
five months and had spent every farthing he had; his wife’s last rags had
just been pawned; and meanwhile a child had been born to them and—and
today I have a final refusal to my petition, and I have hardly a crumb of bread
left—I have nothing left; my wife has had a baby lately—and
I—I—’
</p>

<p>
“He sprang up from his chair and turned away. His wife was crying in the
corner; the child had begun to moan again. I pulled out my note-book and began
writing in it. When I had finished and rose from my chair he was standing
before me with an expression of alarmed curiosity.
</p>

<p>
“‘I have jotted down your name,’ I told him, ‘and all
the rest of it—the place you served at, the district, the date, and all.
I have a friend, Bachmatoff, whose uncle is a councillor of state and has to do
with these matters, one Peter Matveyevitch Bachmatoff.’
</p>

<p>
“‘Peter Matveyevitch Bachmatoff!’ he cried, trembling all
over with excitement. ‘Why, nearly everything depends on that very
man!’
</p>

<p>
“It is very curious, this story of the medical man, and my visit, and the
happy termination to which I contributed by accident! Everything fitted in, as
in a novel. I told the poor people not to put much hope in me, because I was
but a poor schoolboy myself—(I am not really, but I humiliated myself as
much as possible in order to make them less hopeful)—but that I would go
at once to the Vassili Ostroff and see my friend; and that as I knew for
certain that his uncle adored him, and was absolutely devoted to him as the
last hope and branch of the family, perhaps the old man might do something to
oblige his nephew.
</p>

<p>
“‘If only they would allow me to explain all to his excellency! If
I could but be permitted to tell my tale to him!” he cried, trembling
with feverish agitation, and his eyes flashing with excitement. I repeated once
more that I could not hold out much hope—that it would probably end in
smoke, and if I did not turn up next morning they must make up their minds that
there was no more to be done in the matter.
</p>

<p>
“They showed me out with bows and every kind of respect; they seemed
quite beside themselves. I shall never forget the expression of their faces!
</p>

<p>
“I took a droshky and drove over to the Vassili Ostroff at once. For some
years I had been at enmity with this young Bachmatoff, at school. We considered
him an aristocrat; at all events I called him one. He used to dress smartly,
and always drove to school in a private trap. He was a good companion, and was
always merry and jolly, sometimes even witty, though he was not very
intellectual, in spite of the fact that he was always top of the class; I
myself was never top in anything! All his companions were very fond of him,
excepting myself. He had several times during those years come up to me and
tried to make friends; but I had always turned sulkily away and refused to have
anything to do with him. I had not seen him for a whole year now; he was at the
university. When, at nine o’clock, or so, this evening, I arrived and was
shown up to him with great ceremony, he first received me with astonishment,
and not too affably, but he soon cheered up, and suddenly gazed intently at me
and burst out laughing.
</p>

<p>
“‘Why, what on earth can have possessed you to come and see
<i>me</i>, Terentieff?’ he cried, with his usual pleasant, sometimes
audacious, but never offensive familiarity, which I liked in reality, but for
which I also detested him. ‘Why what’s the matter?’ he cried
in alarm. ‘Are you ill?’
</p>

<p>
“That confounded cough of mine had come on again; I fell into a chair,
and with difficulty recovered my breath. ‘It’s all right,
it’s only consumption’ I said. ‘I have come to you with a
petition!’
</p>

<p>
“He sat down in amazement, and I lost no time in telling him the medical
man’s history; and explained that he, with the influence which he
possessed over his uncle, might do some good to the poor fellow.
</p>

<p>
“‘I’ll do it—I’ll do it, of course!’ he
said. ‘I shall attack my uncle about it tomorrow morning, and I’m
very glad you told me the story. But how was it that you thought of coming to
me about it, Terentieff?’
</p>

<p>
“‘So much depends upon your uncle,’ I said. ‘And
besides we have always been enemies, Bachmatoff; and as you are a generous sort
of fellow, I thought you would not refuse my request because I was your
enemy!’ I added with irony.
</p>

<p>
“‘Like Napoleon going to England, eh?’ cried he, laughing.
‘I’ll do it though—of course, and at once, if I can!’
he added, seeing that I rose seriously from my chair at this point.
</p>

<p>
“And sure enough the matter ended as satisfactorily as possible. A month
or so later my medical friend was appointed to another post. He got his
travelling expenses paid, and something to help him to start life with once
more. I think Bachmatoff must have persuaded the doctor to accept a loan from
himself. I saw Bachmatoff two or three times, about this period, the third time
being when he gave a farewell dinner to the doctor and his wife before their
departure, a champagne dinner.
</p>

<p>
“Bachmatoff saw me home after the dinner and we crossed the Nicolai
bridge. We were both a little drunk. He told me of his joy, the joyful feeling
of having done a good action; he said that it was all thanks to myself that he
could feel this satisfaction; and held forth about the foolishness of the
theory that individual charity is useless.
</p>

<p>
“I, too, was burning to have my say!
</p>

<p>
“‘In Moscow,’ I said, ‘there was an old state
counsellor, a civil general, who, all his life, had been in the habit of
visiting the prisons and speaking to criminals. Every party of convicts on its
way to Siberia knew beforehand that on the Vorobeef Hills the “old
general” would pay them a visit. He did all he undertook seriously and
devotedly. He would walk down the rows of the unfortunate prisoners, stop
before each individual and ask after his needs—he never sermonized them;
he spoke kindly to them—he gave them money; he brought them all sorts of
necessaries for the journey, and gave them devotional books, choosing those who
could read, under the firm conviction that they would read to those who could
not, as they went along.
</p>

<p>
“‘He scarcely ever talked about the particular crimes of any of
them, but listened if any volunteered information on that point. All the
convicts were equal for him, and he made no distinction. He spoke to all as to
brothers, and every one of them looked upon him as a father. When he observed
among the exiles some poor woman with a child, he would always come forward and
fondle the little one, and make it laugh. He continued these acts of mercy up
to his very death; and by that time all the criminals, all over Russia and
Siberia, knew him!
</p>

<p>
“‘A man I knew who had been to Siberia and returned, told me that
he himself had been a witness of how the very most hardened criminals
remembered the old general, though, in point of fact, he could never, of
course, have distributed more than a few pence to each member of a party. Their
recollection of him was not sentimental or particularly devoted. Some wretch,
for instance, who had been a murderer—cutting the throat of a dozen
fellow-creatures, for instance; or stabbing six little children for his own
amusement (there have been such men!)—would perhaps, without rhyme or
reason, suddenly give a sigh and say, “I wonder whether that old general
is alive still!” Although perhaps he had not thought of mentioning him
for a dozen years before! How can one say what seed of good may have been
dropped into his soul, never to die?’
</p>

<p>
“I continued in that strain for a long while, pointing out to Bachmatoff
how impossible it is to follow up the effects of any isolated good deed one may
do, in all its influences and subtle workings upon the heart and after-actions
of others.
</p>

<p>
“‘And to think that you are to be cut off from life!’
remarked Bachmatoff, in a tone of reproach, as though he would like to find
someone to pitch into on my account.
</p>

<p>
“We were leaning over the balustrade of the bridge, looking into the Neva
at this moment.
</p>

<p>
“‘Do you know what has suddenly come into my head?’ said I,
suddenly—leaning further and further over the rail.
</p>

<p>
“‘Surely not to throw yourself into the river?’ cried
Bachmatoff in alarm. Perhaps he read my thought in my face.
</p>

<p>
“‘No, not yet. At present nothing but the following consideration.
You see I have some two or three months left me to live—perhaps four;
well, supposing that when I have but a month or two more, I take a fancy for
some “good deed” that needs both trouble and time, like this
business of our doctor friend, for instance: why, I shall have to give up the
idea of it and take to something else—some <i>little</i> good deed,
<i>more within my means</i>, eh? Isn’t that an amusing idea!’
</p>

<p>
“Poor Bachmatoff was much impressed—painfully so. He took me all
the way home; not attempting to console me, but behaving with the greatest
delicacy. On taking leave he pressed my hand warmly and asked permission to
come and see me. I replied that if he came to me as a ‘comforter,’
so to speak (for he would be in that capacity whether he spoke to me in a
soothing manner or only kept silence, as I pointed out to him), he would but
remind me each time of my approaching death! He shrugged his shoulders, but
quite agreed with me; and we parted better friends than I had expected.
</p>

<p>
“But that evening and that night were sown the first seeds of my
‘last conviction.’ I seized greedily on my new idea; I thirstily
drank in all its different aspects (I did not sleep a wink that night!), and
the deeper I went into it the more my being seemed to merge itself in it, and
the more alarmed I became. A dreadful terror came over me at last, and did not
leave me all next day.
</p>

<p>
“Sometimes, thinking over this, I became quite numb with the terror of
it; and I might well have deduced from this fact, that my ‘last
conviction’ was eating into my being too fast and too seriously, and
would undoubtedly come to its climax before long. And for the climax I needed
greater determination than I yet possessed.
</p>

<p>
“However, within three weeks my determination was taken, owing to a very
strange circumstance.
</p>

<p>
“Here on my paper, I make a note of all the figures and dates that come
into my explanation. Of course, it is all the same to me, but just
now—and perhaps only at this moment—I desire that all those who are
to judge of my action should see clearly out of how logical a sequence of
deductions has at length proceeded my ‘last conviction.’
</p>

<p>
“I have said above that the determination needed by me for the
accomplishment of my final resolve, came to hand not through any sequence of
causes, but thanks to a certain strange circumstance which had perhaps no
connection whatever with the matter at issue. Ten days ago Rogojin called upon
me about certain business of his own with which I have nothing to do at
present. I had never seen Rogojin before, but had often heard about him.
</p>

<p>
“I gave him all the information he needed, and he very soon took his
departure; so that, since he only came for the purpose of gaining the
information, the matter might have been expected to end there.
</p>

<p>
“But he interested me too much, and all that day I was under the
influence of strange thoughts connected with him, and I determined to return
his visit the next day.
</p>

<p>
“Rogojin was evidently by no means pleased to see me, and hinted,
delicately, that he saw no reason why our acquaintance should continue. For all
that, however, I spent a very interesting hour, and so, I dare say, did he.
There was so great a contrast between us that I am sure we must both have felt
it; anyhow, I felt it acutely. Here was I, with my days numbered, and he, a man
in the full vigour of life, living in the present, without the slightest
thought for ‘final convictions,’ or numbers, or days, or, in fact,
for anything but that which-which—well, which he was mad about, if he
will excuse me the expression—as a feeble author who cannot express his
ideas properly.
</p>

<p>
“In spite of his lack of amiability, I could not help seeing, in Rogojin
a man of intellect and sense; and although, perhaps, there was little in the
outside world which was of interest to him, still he was clearly a man with
eyes to see.
</p>

<p>
“I hinted nothing to him about my ‘final conviction,’ but it
appeared to me that he had guessed it from my words. He remained
silent—he is a terribly silent man. I remarked to him, as I rose to
depart, that, in spite of the contrast and the wide differences between us two,
les extremites se touchent (‘extremes meet,’ as I explained to him
in Russian); so that maybe he was not so far from my final conviction as
appeared.
</p>

<p>
“His only reply to this was a sour grimace. He rose and looked for my
cap, and placed it in my hand, and led me out of the house—that dreadful
gloomy house of his—to all appearances, of course, as though I were
leaving of my own accord, and he were simply seeing me to the door out of
politeness. His house impressed me much; it is like a burial-ground, he seems
to like it, which is, however, quite natural. Such a full life as he leads is
so overflowing with absorbing interests that he has little need of assistance
from his surroundings.
</p>

<p>
“The visit to Rogojin exhausted me terribly. Besides, I had felt ill
since the morning; and by evening I was so weak that I took to my bed, and was
in high fever at intervals, and even delirious. Colia sat with me until eleven
o’clock.
</p>

<p>
“Yet I remember all he talked about, and every word we said, though
whenever my eyes closed for a moment I could picture nothing but the image of
Surikoff just in the act of finding a million roubles. He could not make up his
mind what to do with the money, and tore his hair over it. He trembled with
fear that somebody would rob him, and at last he decided to bury it in the
ground. I persuaded him that, instead of putting it all away uselessly
underground, he had better melt it down and make a golden coffin out of it for
his starved child, and then dig up the little one and put her into the golden
coffin. Surikoff accepted this suggestion, I thought, with tears of gratitude,
and immediately commenced to carry out my design.
</p>

<p>
“I thought I spat on the ground and left him in disgust. Colia told me,
when I quite recovered my senses, that I had not been asleep for a moment, but
that I had spoken to him about Surikoff the whole while.
</p>

<p>
“At moments I was in a state of dreadful weakness and misery, so that
Colia was greatly disturbed when he left me.
</p>

<p>
“When I arose to lock the door after him, I suddenly called to mind a
picture I had noticed at Rogojin’s in one of his gloomiest rooms, over
the door. He had pointed it out to me himself as we walked past it, and I
believe I must have stood a good five minutes in front of it. There was nothing
artistic about it, but the picture made me feel strangely uncomfortable. It
represented Christ just taken down from the cross. It seems to me that painters
as a rule represent the Saviour, both on the cross and taken down from it, with
great beauty still upon His face. This marvellous beauty they strive to
preserve even in His moments of deepest agony and passion. But there was no
such beauty in Rogojin’s picture. This was the presentment of a poor
mangled body which had evidently suffered unbearable anguish even before its
crucifixion, full of wounds and bruises, marks of the violence of soldiers and
people, and of the bitterness of the moment when He had fallen with the
cross—all this combined with the anguish of the actual crucifixion.
</p>

<p>
“The face was depicted as though still suffering; as though the body,
only just dead, was still almost quivering with agony. The picture was one of
pure nature, for the face was not beautified by the artist, but was left as it
would naturally be, whosoever the sufferer, after such anguish.
</p>

<p>
“I know that the earliest Christian faith taught that the Saviour
suffered actually and not figuratively, and that nature was allowed her own way
even while His body was on the cross.
</p>

<p>
“It is strange to look on this dreadful picture of the mangled corpse of
the Saviour, and to put this question to oneself: ‘Supposing that the
disciples, the future apostles, the women who had followed Him and stood by the
cross, all of whom believed in and worshipped Him—supposing that they saw
this tortured body, this face so mangled and bleeding and bruised (and they
<i>must</i> have so seen it)—how could they have gazed upon the dreadful
sight and yet have believed that He would rise again?’
</p>

<p>
“The thought steps in, whether one likes it or no, that death is so
terrible and so powerful, that even He who conquered it in His miracles during
life was unable to triumph over it at the last. He who called to Lazarus,
‘Lazarus, come forth!’ and the dead man lived—He was now
Himself a prey to nature and death. Nature appears to one, looking at this
picture, as some huge, implacable, dumb monster; or still better—a
stranger simile—some enormous mechanical engine of modern days which has
seized and crushed and swallowed up a great and invaluable Being, a Being worth
nature and all her laws, worth the whole earth, which was perhaps created
merely for the sake of the advent of that Being.
</p>

<p>
“This blind, dumb, implacable, eternal, unreasoning force is well shown
in the picture, and the absolute subordination of all men and things to it is
so well expressed that the idea unconsciously arises in the mind of anyone who
looks at it. All those faithful people who were gazing at the cross and its
mutilated occupant must have suffered agony of mind that evening; for they must
have felt that all their hopes and almost all their faith had been shattered at
a blow. They must have separated in terror and dread that night, though each
perhaps carried away with him one great thought which was never eradicated from
his mind for ever afterwards. If this great Teacher of theirs could have seen
Himself after the Crucifixion, how could He have consented to mount the Cross
and to die as He did? This thought also comes into the mind of the man who
gazes at this picture. I thought of all this by snatches probably between my
attacks of delirium—for an hour and a half or so before Colia’s
departure.
</p>

<p>
“Can there be an appearance of that which has no form? And yet it seemed
to me, at certain moments, that I beheld in some strange and impossible form,
that dark, dumb, irresistibly powerful, eternal force.
</p>

<p>
“I thought someone led me by the hand and showed me, by the light of a
candle, a huge, loathsome insect, which he assured me was that very force, that
very almighty, dumb, irresistible Power, and laughed at the indignation with
which I received this information. In my room they always light the little lamp
before my icon for the night; it gives a feeble flicker of light, but it is
strong enough to see by dimly, and if you sit just under it you can even read
by it. I think it was about twelve or a little past that night. I had not slept
a wink, and was lying with my eyes wide open, when suddenly the door opened,
and in came Rogojin.
</p>

<p>
“He entered, and shut the door behind him. Then he silently gazed at me
and went quickly to the corner of the room where the lamp was burning and sat
down underneath it.
</p>

<p>
“I was much surprised, and looked at him expectantly.
</p>

<p>
“Rogojin only leaned his elbow on the table and silently stared at me. So
passed two or three minutes, and I recollect that his silence hurt and offended
me very much. Why did he not speak?
</p>

<p>
“That his arrival at this time of night struck me as more or less strange
may possibly be the case; but I remember I was by no means amazed at it. On the
contrary, though I had not actually told him my thought in the morning, yet I
know he understood it; and this thought was of such a character that it would
not be anything very remarkable, if one were to come for further talk about it
at any hour of night, however late.
</p>

<p>
“I thought he must have come for this purpose.
</p>

<p>
“In the morning we had parted not the best of friends; I remember he
looked at me with disagreeable sarcasm once or twice; and this same look I
observed in his eyes now—which was the cause of the annoyance I felt.
</p>

<p>
“I did not for a moment suspect that I was delirious and that this
Rogojin was but the result of fever and excitement. I had not the slightest
idea of such a theory at first.
</p>

<p>
“Meanwhile he continued to sit and stare jeeringly at me.
</p>

<p>
“I angrily turned round in bed and made up my mind that I would not say a
word unless he did; so I rested silently on my pillow determined to remain
dumb, if it were to last till morning. I felt resolved that he should speak
first. Probably twenty minutes or so passed in this way. Suddenly the idea
struck me—what if this is an apparition and not Rogojin himself?
</p>

<p>
“Neither during my illness nor at any previous time had I ever seen an
apparition;—but I had always thought, both when I was a little boy, and
even now, that if I were to see one I should die on the spot—though I
don’t believe in ghosts. And yet <i>now</i>, when the idea struck me that
this was a ghost and not Rogojin at all, I was not in the least alarmed.
Nay—the thought actually irritated me. Strangely enough, the decision of
the question as to whether this were a ghost or Rogojin did not, for some
reason or other, interest me nearly so much as it ought to have done;—I
think I began to muse about something altogether different. For instance, I
began to wonder why Rogojin, who had been in dressing-gown and slippers when I
saw him at home, had now put on a dress-coat and white waistcoat and tie? I
also thought to myself, I remember—‘if this is a ghost, and I am
not afraid of it, why don’t I approach it and verify my suspicions?
Perhaps I am afraid—’ And no sooner did this last idea enter my
head than an icy blast blew over me; I felt a chill down my backbone and my
knees shook.
</p>

<p>
“At this very moment, as though divining my thoughts, Rogojin raised his
head from his arm and began to part his lips as though he were going to
laugh—but he continued to stare at me as persistently as before.
</p>

<p>
“I felt so furious with him at this moment that I longed to rush at him;
but as I had sworn that he should speak first, I continued to lie
still—and the more willingly, as I was still by no means satisfied as to
whether it really was Rogojin or not.
</p>

<p>
“I cannot remember how long this lasted; I cannot recollect, either,
whether consciousness forsook me at intervals, or not. But at last Rogojin
rose, staring at me as intently as ever, but not smiling any longer,—and
walking very softly, almost on tip-toes, to the door, he opened it, went out,
and shut it behind him.
</p>

<p>
“I did not rise from my bed, and I don’t know how long I lay with
my eyes open, thinking. I don’t know what I thought about, nor how I fell
asleep or became insensible; but I awoke next morning after nine o’clock
when they knocked at my door. My general orders are that if I don’t open
the door and call, by nine o’clock, Matreona is to come and bring my tea.
When I now opened the door to her, the thought suddenly struck me—how
could he have come in, since the door was locked? I made inquiries and found
that Rogojin himself could not possibly have come in, because all our doors
were locked for the night.
</p>

<p>
“Well, this strange circumstance—which I have described with so
much detail—was the ultimate cause which led me to taking my final
determination. So that no logic, or logical deductions, had anything to do with
my resolve;—it was simply a matter of disgust.
</p>

<p>
“It was impossible for me to go on living when life was full of such
detestable, strange, tormenting forms. This ghost had humiliated me;—nor
could I bear to be subordinate to that dark, horrible force which was embodied
in the form of the loathsome insect. It was only towards evening, when I had
quite made up my mind on this point, that I began to feel easier.”
</p>

<h3>VII.</h3>

<p>
“I had a small pocket pistol. I had procured it while still a boy, at
that droll age when the stories of duels and highwaymen begin to delight one,
and when one imagines oneself nobly standing fire at some future day, in a
duel.
</p>

<p>
“There were a couple of old bullets in the bag which contained the
pistol, and powder enough in an old flask for two or three charges.
</p>

<p>
“The pistol was a wretched thing, very crooked and wouldn’t carry
farther than fifteen paces at the most. However, it would send your skull
flying well enough if you pressed the muzzle of it against your temple.
</p>

<p>
“I determined to die at Pavlofsk at sunrise, in the park—so as to
make no commotion in the house.
</p>

<p>
“This ‘explanation’ will make the matter clear enough to the
police. Students of psychology, and anyone else who likes, may make what they
please of it. I should not like this paper, however, to be made public. I
request the prince to keep a copy himself, and to give a copy to Aglaya
Ivanovna Epanchin. This is my last will and testament. As for my skeleton, I
bequeath it to the Medical Academy for the benefit of science.
</p>

<p>
“I recognize no jurisdiction over myself, and I know that I am now beyond
the power of laws and judges.
</p>

<p>
“A little while ago a very amusing idea struck me. What if I were now to
commit some terrible crime—murder ten fellow-creatures, for instance, or
anything else that is thought most shocking and dreadful in this
world—what a dilemma my judges would be in, with a criminal who only has
a fortnight to live in any case, now that the rack and other forms of torture
are abolished! Why, I should die comfortably in their own hospital—in a
warm, clean room, with an attentive doctor—probably much more comfortably
than I should at home.
</p>

<p>
“I don’t understand why people in my position do not oftener
indulge in such ideas—if only for a joke! Perhaps they do! Who knows!
There are plenty of merry souls among us!
</p>

<p>
“But though I do not recognize any jurisdiction over myself, still I know
that I shall be judged, when I am nothing but a voiceless lump of clay;
therefore I do not wish to go before I have left a word of reply—the
reply of a free man—not one forced to justify himself—oh no! I have
no need to ask forgiveness of anyone. I wish to say a word merely because I
happen to desire it of my own free will.
</p>

<p>
“Here, in the first place, comes a strange thought!
</p>

<p>
“Who, in the name of what Law, would think of disputing my full personal
right over the fortnight of life left to me? What jurisdiction can be brought
to bear upon the case? Who would wish me, not only to be sentenced, but to
endure the sentence to the end? Surely there exists no man who would wish such
a thing—why should anyone desire it? For the sake of morality? Well, I
can understand that if I were to make an attempt upon my own life while in the
enjoyment of full health and vigour—my life which might have been
‘useful,’ etc., etc.—morality might reproach me, according to
the old routine, for disposing of my life without permission—or whatever
its tenet may be. But now, <i>now</i>, when my sentence is out and my days
numbered! How can morality have need of my last breaths, and why should I die
listening to the consolations offered by the prince, who, without doubt, would
not omit to demonstrate that death is actually a benefactor to me? (Christians
like him always end up with that—it is their pet theory.) And what do
they want with their ridiculous ‘Pavlofsk trees’? To sweeten my
last hours? Cannot they understand that the more I forget myself, the more I
let myself become attached to these last illusions of life and love, by means
of which they try to hide from me Meyer’s wall, and all that is so
plainly written on it—the more unhappy they make me? What is the use of
all your nature to me—all your parks and trees, your sunsets and
sunrises, your blue skies and your self-satisfied faces—when all this
wealth of beauty and happiness begins with the fact that it accounts
me—only me—one too many! What is the good of all this beauty and
glory to me, when every second, every moment, I cannot but be aware that this
little fly which buzzes around my head in the sun’s rays—even this
little fly is a sharer and participator in all the glory of the universe, and
knows its place and is happy in it;—while I—only I, am an outcast,
and have been blind to the fact hitherto, thanks to my simplicity! Oh! I know
well how the prince and others would like me, instead of indulging in all these
wicked words of my own, to sing, to the glory and triumph of morality, that
well-known verse of Gilbert’s:
</p>

<p class="poem">
“‘O, puissent voir longtemps votre beauté sacrée<br />
Tant d’amis, sourds à mes adieux!<br />
Qu’ils meurent pleins de jours, que leur mort soit pleurée,<br />
Qu’un ami leur ferme les yeux!’
</p>

<p>
“But believe me, believe me, my simple-hearted friends, that in this
highly moral verse, in this academical blessing to the world in general in the
French language, is hidden the intensest gall and bitterness; but so well
concealed is the venom, that I dare say the poet actually persuaded himself
that his words were full of the tears of pardon and peace, instead of the
bitterness of disappointment and malice, and so died in the delusion.
</p>

<p>
“Do you know there is a limit of ignominy, beyond which man’s
consciousness of shame cannot go, and after which begins satisfaction in shame?
Well, of course humility is a great force in that sense, I admit
that—though not in the sense in which religion accounts humility to be
strength!
</p>

<p>
“Religion!—I admit eternal life—and perhaps I always did
admit it.
</p>

<p>
“Admitted that consciousness is called into existence by the will of a
Higher Power; admitted that this consciousness looks out upon the world and
says ‘I am;’ and admitted that the Higher Power wills that the
consciousness so called into existence, be suddenly extinguished (for
so—for some unexplained reason—it is and must be)—still there
comes the eternal question—why must I be humble through all this? Is it
not enough that I am devoured, without my being expected to bless the power
that devours me? Surely—surely I need not suppose that
Somebody—there—will be offended because I do not wish to live out
the fortnight allowed me? I don’t believe it.
</p>

<p>
“It is much simpler, and far more likely, to believe that my death is
needed—the death of an insignificant atom—in order to fulfil the
general harmony of the universe—in order to make even some plus or minus
in the sum of existence. Just as every day the death of numbers of beings is
necessary because without their annihilation the rest cannot live
on—(although we must admit that the idea is not a particularly grand one
in itself!)
</p>

<p>
“However—admit the fact! Admit that without such perpetual
devouring of one another the world cannot continue to exist, or could never
have been organized—I am ever ready to confess that I cannot understand
why this is so—but I’ll tell you what I <i>do</i> know, for
certain. If I have once been given to understand and realize that I
<i>am</i>—what does it matter to me that the world is organized on a
system full of errors and that otherwise it cannot be organized at all? Who
will or can judge me after this? Say what you like—the thing is
impossible and unjust!
</p>

<p>
“And meanwhile I have never been able, in spite of my great desire to do
so, to persuade myself that there is no future existence, and no Providence.
</p>

<p>
“The fact of the matter is that all this <i>does</i> exist, but that we
know absolutely nothing about the future life and its laws!
</p>

<p>
“But it is so difficult, and even impossible to understand, that surely I
am not to be blamed because I could not fathom the incomprehensible?
</p>

<p>
“Of course I know they say that one must be obedient, and of course, too,
the prince is one of those who say so: that one must be obedient without
questions, out of pure goodness of heart, and that for my worthy conduct in
this matter I shall meet with reward in another world. We degrade God when we
attribute our own ideas to Him, out of annoyance that we cannot fathom His
ways.
</p>

<p>
“Again, I repeat, I cannot be blamed because I am unable to understand
that which it is not given to mankind to fathom. Why am I to be judged because
I could not comprehend the Will and Laws of Providence? No, we had better drop
religion.
</p>

<p>
“And enough of this. By the time I have got so far in the reading of my
document the sun will be up and the huge force of his rays will be acting upon
the living world. So be it. I shall die gazing straight at the great Fountain
of life and power; I do not want this life!
</p>

<p>
“If I had had the power to prevent my own birth I should certainly never
have consented to accept existence under such ridiculous conditions. However, I
have the power to end my existence, although I do but give back days that are
already numbered. It is an insignificant gift, and my revolt is equally
insignificant.
</p>

<p>
“Final explanation: I die, not in the least because I am unable to
support these next three weeks. Oh no, I should find strength enough, and if I
wished it I could obtain consolation from the thought of the injury that is
done me. But I am not a French poet, and I do not desire such consolation. And
finally, nature has so limited my capacity for work or activity of any kind, in
allotting me but three weeks of time, that suicide is about the only thing left
that I can begin and end in the time of my own free will.
</p>

<p>
“Perhaps then I am anxious to take advantage of my last chance of doing
something for myself. A protest is sometimes no small thing.”
</p>

<p>
The explanation was finished; Hippolyte paused at last.
</p>

<p>
There is, in extreme cases, a final stage of cynical candour when a nervous
man, excited, and beside himself with emotion, will be afraid of nothing and
ready for any sort of scandal, nay, glad of it. The extraordinary, almost
unnatural, tension of the nerves which upheld Hippolyte up to this point, had
now arrived at this final stage. This poor feeble boy of
eighteen—exhausted by disease—looked for all the world as weak and
frail as a leaflet torn from its parent tree and trembling in the breeze; but
no sooner had his eye swept over his audience, for the first time during the
whole of the last hour, than the most contemptuous, the most haughty expression
of repugnance lighted up his face. He defied them all, as it were. But his
hearers were indignant, too; they rose to their feet with annoyance. Fatigue,
the wine consumed, the strain of listening so long, all added to the
disagreeable impression which the reading had made upon them.
</p>

<p>
Suddenly Hippolyte jumped up as though he had been shot.
</p>

<p>
“The sun is rising,” he cried, seeing the gilded tops of the trees,
and pointing to them as to a miracle. “See, it is rising now!”
</p>

<p>
“Well, what then? Did you suppose it wasn’t going to rise?”
asked Ferdishenko.
</p>

<p>
“It’s going to be atrociously hot again all day,” said Gania,
with an air of annoyance, taking his hat. “A month of this... Are you
coming home, Ptitsin?” Hippolyte listened to this in amazement, almost
amounting to stupefaction. Suddenly he became deadly pale and shuddered.
</p>

<p>
“You manage your composure too awkwardly. I see you wish to insult
me,” he cried to Gania. “You—you are a cur!” He looked
at Gania with an expression of malice.
</p>

<p>
“What on earth is the matter with the boy? What phenomenal
feeble-mindedness!” exclaimed Ferdishenko.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, he’s simply a fool,” said Gania.
</p>

<p>
Hippolyte braced himself up a little.
</p>

<p>
“I understand, gentlemen,” he began, trembling as before, and
stumbling over every word, “that I have deserved your resentment,
and—and am sorry that I should have troubled you with this raving
nonsense” (pointing to his article), “or rather, I am sorry that I
have not troubled you enough.” He smiled feebly. “Have I troubled
you, Evgenie Pavlovitch?” He suddenly turned on Evgenie with this
question. “Tell me now, have I troubled you or not?”
</p>

<p>
“Well, it was a little drawn out, perhaps; but—”
</p>

<p>
“Come, speak out! Don’t lie, for once in your life—speak
out!” continued Hippolyte, quivering with agitation.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, my good sir, I assure you it’s entirely the same to me. Please
leave me in peace,” said Evgenie, angrily, turning his back on him.
</p>

<p>
“Good-night, prince,” said Ptitsin, approaching his host.
</p>

<p>
“What are you thinking of? Don’t go, he’ll blow his brains
out in a minute!” cried Vera Lebedeff, rushing up to Hippolyte and
catching hold of his hands in a torment of alarm. “What are you thinking
of? He said he would blow his brains out at sunrise.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, he won’t shoot himself!” cried several voices,
sarcastically.
</p>

<p>
“Gentlemen, you’d better look out,” cried Colia, also seizing
Hippolyte by the hand. “Just look at him! Prince, what are you thinking
of?” Vera and Colia, and Keller, and Burdovsky were all crowding round
Hippolyte now and holding him down.
</p>

<p>
“He has the right—the right—” murmured Burdovsky.
“Excuse me, prince, but what are your arrangements?” asked
Lebedeff, tipsy and exasperated, going up to Muishkin.
</p>

<p>
“What do you mean by ‘arrangements’?”
</p>

<p>
“No, no, excuse me! I’m master of this house, though I do not wish
to lack respect towards you. You are master of the house too, in a way; but I
can’t allow this sort of thing—”
</p>

<p>
“He won’t shoot himself; the boy is only playing the fool,”
said General Ivolgin, suddenly and unexpectedly, with indignation.
</p>

<p>
“I know he won’t, I know he won’t, general; but
I—I’m master here!”
</p>

<p>
“Listen, Mr. Terentieff,” said Ptitsin, who had bidden the prince
good-night, and was now holding out his hand to Hippolyte; “I think you
remark in that manuscript of yours, that you bequeath your skeleton to the
Academy. Are you referring to your own skeleton—I mean, your very
bones?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, my bones, I—”
</p>

<p>
“Quite so, I see; because, you know, little mistakes have occurred now
and then. There was a case—”
</p>

<p>
“Why do you tease him?” cried the prince, suddenly.
</p>

<p>
“You’ve moved him to tears,” added Ferdishenko. But Hippolyte
was by no means weeping. He was about to move from his place, when his four
guards rushed at him and seized him once more. There was a laugh at this.
</p>

<p>
“He led up to this on purpose. He took the trouble of writing all that so
that people should come and grab him by the arm,” observed Rogojin.
“Good-night, prince. What a time we’ve sat here, my very bones
ache!”
</p>

<p>
“If you really intended to shoot yourself, Terentieff,” said
Evgenie Pavlovitch, laughing, “if I were you, after all these
compliments, I should just not shoot myself in order to vex them all.”
</p>

<p>
“They are very anxious to see me blow my brains out,” said
Hippolyte, bitterly.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, they’ll be awfully annoyed if they don’t see it.”
</p>

<p>
“Then you think they won’t see it?”
</p>

<p>
“I am not trying to egg you on. On the contrary, I think it very likely
that you may shoot yourself; but the principal thing is to keep cool,”
said Evgenie with a drawl, and with great condescension.
</p>

<p>
“I only now perceive what a terrible mistake I made in reading this
article to them,” said Hippolyte, suddenly, addressing Evgenie, and
looking at him with an expression of trust and confidence, as though he were
applying to a friend for counsel.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, it’s a droll situation; I really don’t know what advice
to give you,” replied Evgenie, laughing. Hippolyte gazed steadfastly at
him, but said nothing. To look at him one might have supposed that he was
unconscious at intervals.
</p>

<p>
“Excuse me,” said Lebedeff, “but did you observe the young
gentleman’s style? ‘I’ll go and blow my brains out in the
park,’ says he, ‘so as not to disturb anyone.’ He thinks he
won’t disturb anybody if he goes three yards away, into the park, and
blows his brains out there.”
</p>

<p>
“Gentlemen—” began the prince.
</p>

<p>
“No, no, excuse me, most revered prince,” Lebedeff interrupted,
excitedly. “Since you must have observed yourself that this is no joke,
and since at least half your guests must also have concluded that after all
that has been said this youth <i>must</i> blow his brains out for
honour’s sake—I—as master of this house, and before these
witnesses, now call upon you to take steps.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, but what am I to do, Lebedeff? What steps am I to take? I am
ready.”
</p>

<p>
“I’ll tell you. In the first place he must immediately deliver up
the pistol which he boasted of, with all its appurtenances. If he does this I
shall consent to his being allowed to spend the night in this
house—considering his feeble state of health, and of course conditionally
upon his being under proper supervision. But tomorrow he must go elsewhere.
Excuse me, prince! Should he refuse to deliver up his weapon, then I shall
instantly seize one of his arms and General Ivolgin the other, and we shall
hold him until the police arrive and take the matter into their own hands. Mr.
Ferdishenko will kindly fetch them.”
</p>

<p>
At this there was a dreadful noise; Lebedeff danced about in his excitement;
Ferdishenko prepared to go for the police; Gania frantically insisted that it
was all nonsense, “for nobody was going to shoot themselves.”
Evgenie Pavlovitch said nothing.
</p>

<p>
“Prince,” whispered Hippolyte, suddenly, his eyes all ablaze,
“you don’t suppose that I did not foresee all this hatred?”
He looked at the prince as though he expected him to reply, for a moment.
“Enough!” he added at length, and addressing the whole company, he
cried: “It’s all my fault, gentlemen! Lebedeff, here’s the
key,” (he took out a small bunch of keys); “this one, the last but
one—Colia will show you—Colia, where’s Colia?” he
cried, looking straight at Colia and not seeing him. “Yes, he’ll
show you; he packed the bag with me this morning. Take him up, Colia; my bag is
upstairs in the prince’s study, under the table. Here’s the key,
and in the little case you’ll find my pistol and the powder, and all.
Colia packed it himself, Mr. Lebedeff; he’ll show you; but it’s on
condition that tomorrow morning, when I leave for Petersburg, you will give me
back my pistol, do you hear? I do this for the prince’s sake, not
yours.”
</p>

<p>
“Capital, that’s much better!” cried Lebedeff, and seizing
the key he made off in haste.
</p>

<p>
Colia stopped a moment as though he wished to say something; but Lebedeff
dragged him away.
</p>

<p>
Hippolyte looked around at the laughing guests. The prince observed that his
teeth were chattering as though in a violent attack of ague.
</p>

<p>
“What brutes they all are!” he whispered to the prince. Whenever he
addressed him he lowered his voice.
</p>

<p>
“Let them alone, you’re too weak now—”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, directly; I’ll go away directly. I’ll—”
</p>

<p>
Suddenly he embraced Muishkin.
</p>

<p>
“Perhaps you think I am mad, eh?” he asked him, laughing very
strangely.
</p>

<p>
“No, but you—”
</p>

<p>
“Directly, directly! Stand still a moment, I wish to look in your eyes;
don’t speak—stand so—let me look at you! I am bidding
farewell to mankind.”
</p>

<p>
He stood so for ten seconds, gazing at the prince, motionless, deadly pale, his
temples wet with perspiration; he held the prince’s hand in a strange
grip, as though afraid to let him go.
</p>

<p>
“Hippolyte, Hippolyte, what is the matter with you?” cried
Muishkin.
</p>

<p>
“Directly! There, that’s enough. I’ll lie down directly. I
must drink to the sun’s health. I wish to—I insist upon it! Let
go!”
</p>

<p>
He seized a glass from the table, broke away from the prince, and in a moment
had reached the terrace steps.
</p>

<p>
The prince made after him, but it so happened that at this moment Evgenie
Pavlovitch stretched out his hand to say good-night. The next instant there was
a general outcry, and then followed a few moments of indescribable excitement.
</p>

<p>
Reaching the steps, Hippolyte had paused, holding the glass in his left hand
while he put his right hand into his coat pocket.
</p>

<p>
Keller insisted afterwards that he had held his right hand in his pocket all
the while, when he was speaking to the prince, and that he had held the
latter’s shoulder with his left hand only. This circumstance, Keller
affirmed, had led him to feel some suspicion from the first. However this may
be, Keller ran after Hippolyte, but he was too late.
</p>

<p>
He caught sight of something flashing in Hippolyte’s right hand, and saw
that it was a pistol. He rushed at him, but at that very instant Hippolyte
raised the pistol to his temple and pulled the trigger. There followed a sharp
metallic click, but no report.
</p>

<p>
When Keller seized the would-be suicide, the latter fell forward into his arms,
probably actually believing that he was shot. Keller had hold of the pistol
now. Hippolyte was immediately placed in a chair, while the whole company
thronged around excitedly, talking and asking each other questions. Every one
of them had heard the snap of the trigger, and yet they saw a live and
apparently unharmed man before them.
</p>

<p>
Hippolyte himself sat quite unconscious of what was going on, and gazed around
with a senseless expression.
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff and Colia came rushing up at this moment.
</p>

<p>
“What is it?” someone asked, breathlessly—“A
misfire?”
</p>

<p>
“Perhaps it wasn’t loaded,” said several voices.
</p>

<p>
“It’s loaded all right,” said Keller, examining the pistol,
“but—”
</p>

<p>
“What! did it miss fire?”
</p>

<p>
“There was no cap in it,” Keller announced.
</p>

<p>
It would be difficult to describe the pitiable scene that now followed. The
first sensation of alarm soon gave place to amusement; some burst out laughing
loud and heartily, and seemed to find a malicious satisfaction in the joke.
Poor Hippolyte sobbed hysterically; he wrung his hands; he approached everyone
in turn—even Ferdishenko—and took them by both hands, and swore
solemnly that he had forgotten—absolutely
forgotten—“accidentally, and not on purpose,”—to put a
cap in—that he “had ten of them, at least, in his pocket.” He
pulled them out and showed them to everyone; he protested that he had not liked
to put one in beforehand for fear of an accidental explosion in his pocket.
That he had thought he would have lots of time to put it in
afterwards—when required—and, that, in the heat of the moment, he
had forgotten all about it. He threw himself upon the prince, then on Evgenie
Pavlovitch. He entreated Keller to give him back the pistol, and he’d
soon show them all that “his honour—his honour,”—but he
was “dishonoured, now, for ever!”
</p>

<p>
He fell senseless at last—and was carried into the prince’s study.
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff, now quite sobered down, sent for a doctor; and he and his daughter,
with Burdovsky and General Ivolgin, remained by the sick man’s couch.
</p>

<p>
When he was carried away unconscious, Keller stood in the middle of the room,
and made the following declaration to the company in general, in a loud tone of
voice, with emphasis upon each word.
</p>

<p>
“Gentlemen, if any one of you casts any doubt again, before me, upon
Hippolyte’s good faith, or hints that the cap was forgotten
intentionally, or suggests that this unhappy boy was acting a part before us, I
beg to announce that the person so speaking shall account to me for his
words.”
</p>

<p>
No one replied.
</p>

<p>
The company departed very quickly, in a mass. Ptitsin, Gania, and Rogojin went
away together.
</p>

<p>
The prince was much astonished that Evgenie Pavlovitch changed his mind, and
took his departure without the conversation he had requested.
</p>

<p>
“Why, you wished to have a talk with me when the others left?” he
said.
</p>

<p>
“Quite so,” said Evgenie, sitting down suddenly beside him,
“but I have changed my mind for the time being. I confess, I am too
disturbed, and so, I think, are you; and the matter as to which I wished to
consult you is too serious to tackle with one’s mind even a little
disturbed; too serious both for myself and for you. You see, prince, for once
in my life I wish to perform an absolutely honest action, that is, an action
with no ulterior motive; and I think I am hardly in a condition to talk of it
just at this moment, and—and—well, we’ll discuss it another
time. Perhaps the matter may gain in clearness if we wait for two or three
days—just the two or three days which I must spend in Petersburg.”
</p>

<p>
Here he rose again from his chair, so that it seemed strange that he should
have thought it worth while to sit down at all.
</p>

<p>
The prince thought, too, that he looked vexed and annoyed, and not nearly so
friendly towards himself as he had been earlier in the night.
</p>

<p>
“I suppose you will go to the sufferer’s bedside now?” he
added.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I am afraid...” began the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, you needn’t fear! He’ll live another six weeks all
right. Very likely he will recover altogether; but I strongly advise you to
pack him off tomorrow.”
</p>

<p>
“I think I may have offended him by saying nothing just now. I am afraid
he may suspect that I doubted his good faith,—about shooting himself, you
know. What do you think, Evgenie Pavlovitch?”
</p>

<p>
“Not a bit of it! You are much too good to him; you shouldn’t care
a hang about what he thinks. I have heard of such things before, but never came
across, till tonight, a man who would actually shoot himself in order to gain a
vulgar notoriety, or blow out his brains for spite, if he finds that people
don’t care to pat him on the back for his sanguinary intentions. But what
astonishes me more than anything is the fellow’s candid confession of
weakness. You’d better get rid of him tomorrow, in any case.”
</p>

<p>
“Do you think he will make another attempt?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh no, not he, not now! But you have to be very careful with this sort
of gentleman. Crime is too often the last resource of these petty nonentities.
This young fellow is quite capable of cutting the throats of ten people, simply
for a lark, as he told us in his ‘explanation.’ I assure you those
confounded words of his will not let me sleep.”
</p>

<p>
“I think you disturb yourself too much.”
</p>

<p>
“What an extraordinary person you are, prince! Do you mean to say that
you doubt the fact that he is capable of murdering ten men?”
</p>

<p>
“I daren’t say, one way or the other; all this is very
strange—but—”
</p>

<p>
“Well, as you like, just as you like,” said Evgenie Pavlovitch,
irritably. “Only you are such a plucky fellow, take care you don’t
get included among the ten victims!”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, he is much more likely not to kill anyone at all,” said the
prince, gazing thoughtfully at Evgenie. The latter laughed disagreeably.
</p>

<p>
“Well, <i>au revoir!</i> Did you observe that he ‘willed’ a
copy of his confession to Aglaya Ivanovna?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I did; I am thinking of it.”
</p>

<p>
“In connection with ‘the ten,’ eh?” laughed Evgenie, as
he left the room.
</p>

<p>
An hour later, towards four o’clock, the prince went into the park. He
had endeavoured to fall asleep, but could not, owing to the painful beating of
his heart.
</p>

<p>
He had left things quiet and peaceful; the invalid was fast asleep, and the
doctor, who had been called in, had stated that there was no special danger.
Lebedeff, Colia, and Burdovsky were lying down in the sick-room, ready to take
it in turns to watch. There was nothing to fear, therefore, at home.
</p>

<p>
But the prince’s mental perturbation increased every moment. He wandered
about the park, looking absently around him, and paused in astonishment when he
suddenly found himself in the empty space with the rows of chairs round it,
near the Vauxhall. The look of the place struck him as dreadful now: so he
turned round and went by the path which he had followed with the Epanchins on
the way to the band, until he reached the green bench which Aglaya had pointed
out for their rendezvous. He sat down on it and suddenly burst into a loud fit
of laughter, immediately followed by a feeling of irritation. His disturbance
of mind continued; he felt that he must go away somewhere, anywhere.
</p>

<p>
Above his head some little bird sang out, of a sudden; he began to peer about
for it among the leaves. Suddenly the bird darted out of the tree and away, and
instantly he thought of the “fly buzzing about in the sun’s
rays” that Hippolyte had talked of; how that it knew its place and was a
participator in the universal life, while he alone was an
“outcast.” This picture had impressed him at the time, and he
meditated upon it now. An old, forgotten memory awoke in his brain, and
suddenly burst into clearness and light. It was a recollection of Switzerland,
during the first year of his cure, the very first months. At that time he had
been pretty nearly an idiot still; he could not speak properly, and had
difficulty in understanding when others spoke to him. He climbed the
mountain-side, one sunny morning, and wandered long and aimlessly with a
certain thought in his brain, which would not become clear. Above him was the
blazing sky, below, the lake; all around was the horizon, clear and infinite.
He looked out upon this, long and anxiously. He remembered how he had stretched
out his arms towards the beautiful, boundless blue of the horizon, and wept,
and wept. What had so tormented him was the idea that he was a stranger to all
this, that he was outside this glorious festival.
</p>

<p>
What was this universe? What was this grand, eternal pageant to which he had
yearned from his childhood up, and in which he could never take part? Every
morning the same magnificent sun; every morning the same rainbow in the
waterfall; every evening the same glow on the snow-mountains.
</p>

<p>
Every little fly that buzzed in the sun’s rays was a singer in the
universal chorus, “knew its place, and was happy in it.” Every
blade of grass grew and was happy. Everything knew its path and loved it, went
forth with a song and returned with a song; only he knew nothing, understood
nothing, neither men nor words, nor any of nature’s voices; he was a
stranger and an outcast.
</p>

<p>
Oh, he could not then speak these words, or express all he felt! He had been
tormented dumbly; but now it appeared to him that he must have said these very
words—even then—and that Hippolyte must have taken his picture of
the little fly from his tears and words of that time.
</p>

<p>
He was sure of it, and his heart beat excitedly at the thought, he knew not
why.
</p>

<p>
He fell asleep on the bench; but his mental disquiet continued through his
slumbers.
</p>

<p>
Just before he dozed off, the idea of Hippolyte murdering ten men flitted
through his brain, and he smiled at the absurdity of such a thought.
</p>

<p>
Around him all was quiet; only the flutter and whisper of the leaves broke the
silence, but broke it only to cause it to appear yet more deep and still.
</p>

<p>
He dreamed many dreams as he sat there, and all were full of disquiet, so that
he shuddered every moment.
</p>

<p>
At length a woman seemed to approach him. He knew her, oh! he knew her only too
well. He could always name her and recognize her anywhere; but, strange, she
seemed to have quite a different face from hers, as he had known it, and he
felt a tormenting desire to be able to say she was not the same woman. In the
face before him there was such dreadful remorse and horror that he thought she
must be a criminal, that she must have just committed some awful crime.
</p>

<p>
Tears were trembling on her white cheek. She beckoned him, but placed her
finger on her lip as though to warn him that he must follow her very quietly.
His heart froze within him. He wouldn’t, he <i>couldn’t</i> confess
her to be a criminal, and yet he felt that something dreadful would happen the
next moment, something which would blast his whole life.
</p>

<p>
She seemed to wish to show him something, not far off, in the park.
</p>

<p>
He rose from his seat in order to follow her, when a bright, clear peal of
laughter rang out by his side. He felt somebody’s hand suddenly in his
own, seized it, pressed it hard, and awoke. Before him stood Aglaya, laughing
aloud.
</p>

<h3>VIII.</h3>

<p>
She laughed, but she was rather angry too.
</p>

<p>
“He’s asleep! You were asleep,” she said, with contemptuous
surprise.
</p>

<p>
“Is it really you?” muttered the prince, not quite himself as yet,
and recognizing her with a start of amazement. “Oh yes, of course,”
he added, “this is our rendezvous. I fell asleep here.”
</p>

<p>
“So I saw.”
</p>

<p>
“Did no one awake me besides yourself? Was there no one else here? I
thought there was another woman.”
</p>

<p>
“There was another woman here?”
</p>

<p>
At last he was wide awake.
</p>

<p>
“It was a dream, of course,” he said, musingly. “Strange that
I should have a dream like that at such a moment. Sit down—”
</p>

<p>
He took her hand and seated her on the bench; then sat down beside her and
reflected.
</p>

<p>
Aglaya did not begin the conversation, but contented herself with watching her
companion intently.
</p>

<p>
He looked back at her, but at times it was clear that he did not see her and
was not thinking of her.
</p>

<p>
Aglaya began to flush up.
</p>

<p>
“Oh yes!” cried the prince, starting. “Hippolyte’s
suicide—”
</p>

<p>
“What? At your house?” she asked, but without much surprise.
“He was alive yesterday evening, wasn’t he? How could you sleep
here after that?” she cried, growing suddenly animated.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, but he didn’t kill himself; the pistol didn’t go
off.” Aglaya insisted on hearing the whole story. She hurried the prince
along, but interrupted him with all sorts of questions, nearly all of which
were irrelevant. Among other things, she seemed greatly interested in every
word that Evgenie Pavlovitch had said, and made the prince repeat that part of
the story over and over again.
</p>

<p>
“Well, that’ll do; we must be quick,” she concluded, after
hearing all. “We have only an hour here, till eight; I must be home by
then without fail, so that they may not find out that I came and sat here with
you; but I’ve come on business. I have a great deal to say to you. But
you have bowled me over considerably with your news. As to Hippolyte, I think
his pistol was bound not to go off; it was more consistent with the whole
affair. Are you sure he really wished to blow his brains out, and that there
was no humbug about the matter?”
</p>

<p>
“No humbug at all.”
</p>

<p>
“Very likely. So he wrote that you were to bring me a copy of his
confession, did he? Why didn’t you bring it?”
</p>

<p>
“Why, he didn’t die! I’ll ask him for it, if you like.”
</p>

<p>
“Bring it by all means; you needn’t ask him. He will be delighted,
you may be sure; for, in all probability, he shot at himself simply in order
that I might read his confession. Don’t laugh at what I say, please, Lef
Nicolaievitch, because it may very well be the case.”
</p>

<p>
“I’m not laughing. I am convinced, myself, that that may have been
partly the reason.”
</p>

<p>
“You are convinced? You don’t really mean to say you think that
honestly?” asked Aglaya, extremely surprised.
</p>

<p>
She put her questions very quickly and talked fast, every now and then
forgetting what she had begun to say, and not finishing her sentence. She
seemed to be impatient to warn the prince about something or other. She was in
a state of unusual excitement, and though she put on a brave and even defiant
air, she seemed to be rather alarmed. She was dressed very simply, but this
suited her well. She continually trembled and blushed, and she sat on the very
edge of the seat.
</p>

<p>
The fact that the prince confirmed her idea, about Hippolyte shooting himself
that she might read his confession, surprised her greatly.
</p>

<p>
“Of course,” added the prince, “he wished us all to applaud
his conduct—besides yourself.”
</p>

<p>
“How do you mean—applaud?”
</p>

<p>
“Well—how am I to explain? He was very anxious that we should all
come around him, and say we were so sorry for him, and that we loved him very
much, and all that; and that we hoped he wouldn’t kill himself, but
remain alive. Very likely he thought more of you than the rest of us, because
he mentioned you at such a moment, though perhaps he did not know himself that
he had you in his mind’s eye.”
</p>

<p>
“I don’t understand you. How could he have me in view, and not be
aware of it himself? And yet, I don’t know—perhaps I do. Do you
know I have intended to poison myself at least thirty times—ever since I
was thirteen or so—and to write to my parents before I did it? I used to
think how nice it would be to lie in my coffin, and have them all weeping over
me and saying it was all their fault for being so cruel, and all
that—what are you smiling at?” she added, knitting her brow.
“What do <i>you</i> think of when you go mooning about alone? I suppose
you imagine yourself a field-marshal, and think you have conquered
Napoleon?”
</p>

<p>
“Well, I really have thought something of the sort now and then,
especially when just dozing off,” laughed the prince. “Only it is
the Austrians whom I conquer—not Napoleon.”
</p>

<p>
“I don’t wish to joke with you, Lef Nicolaievitch. I shall see
Hippolyte myself. Tell him so. As for you, I think you are behaving very badly,
because it is not right to judge a man’s soul as you are judging
Hippolyte’s. You have no gentleness, but only justice—so you are
unjust.”
</p>

<p>
The prince reflected.
</p>

<p>
“I think you are unfair towards me,” he said. “There is
nothing wrong in the thoughts I ascribe to Hippolyte; they are only natural.
But of course I don’t know for certain what he thought. Perhaps he
thought nothing, but simply longed to see human faces once more, and to hear
human praise and feel human affection. Who knows? Only it all came out wrong,
somehow. Some people have luck, and everything comes out right with them;
others have none, and never a thing turns out fortunately.”
</p>

<p>
“I suppose you have felt that in your own case,” said Aglaya.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I have,” replied the prince, quite unsuspicious of any irony
in the remark.
</p>

<p>
“H’m—well, at all events, I shouldn’t have fallen
asleep here, in your place. It wasn’t nice of you, that. I suppose you
fall asleep wherever you sit down?”
</p>

<p>
“But I didn’t sleep a wink all night. I walked and walked about,
and went to where the music was—”
</p>

<p>
“What music?”
</p>

<p>
“Where they played last night. Then I found this bench and sat down, and
thought and thought—and at last I fell fast asleep.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, is that it? That makes a difference, perhaps. What did you go to the
bandstand for?”
</p>

<p>
“I don’t know; I—”
</p>

<p>
“Very well—afterwards. You are always interrupting me. What woman
was it you were dreaming about?”
</p>

<p>
“It was—about—you saw her—”
</p>

<p>
“Quite so; I understand. I understand quite well. You are
very—Well, how did she appear to you? What did she look like? No, I
don’t want to know anything about her,” said Aglaya, angrily;
“don’t interrupt me—”
</p>

<p>
She paused a moment as though getting breath, or trying to master her feeling
of annoyance.
</p>

<p>
“Look here; this is what I called you here for. I wish to make you
a—to ask you to be my friend. What do you stare at me like that
for?” she added, almost angrily.
</p>

<p>
The prince certainly had darted a rather piercing look at her, and now observed
that she had begun to blush violently. At such moments, the more Aglaya
blushed, the angrier she grew with herself; and this was clearly expressed in
her eyes, which flashed like fire. As a rule, she vented her wrath on her
unfortunate companion, be it who it might. She was very conscious of her own
shyness, and was not nearly so talkative as her sisters for this
reason—in fact, at times she was much too quiet. When, therefore, she was
bound to talk, especially at such delicate moments as this, she invariably did
so with an air of haughty defiance. She always knew beforehand when she was
going to blush, long before the blush came.
</p>

<p>
“Perhaps you do not wish to accept my proposition?” she asked,
gazing haughtily at the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Oh yes, I do; but it is so unnecessary. I mean, I did not think you need
make such a proposition,” said the prince, looking confused.
</p>

<p>
“What did you suppose, then? Why did you think I invited you out here? I
suppose you think me a ‘little fool,’ as they all call me at
home?”
</p>

<p>
“I didn’t know they called you a fool. I certainly don’t
think you one.”
</p>

<p>
“You don’t think me one! Oh, dear me!—that’s very
clever of you; you put it so neatly, too.”
</p>

<p>
“In my opinion, you are far from a fool sometimes—in fact, you are
very intelligent. You said a very clever thing just now about my being unjust
because I had <i>only</i> justice. I shall remember that, and think about
it.”
</p>

<p>
Aglaya blushed with pleasure. All these changes in her expression came about so
naturally and so rapidly—they delighted the prince; he watched her, and
laughed.
</p>

<p>
“Listen,” she began again; “I have long waited to tell you
all this, ever since the time when you sent me that letter—even before
that. Half of what I have to say you heard yesterday. I consider you the most
honest and upright of men—more honest and upright than any other man; and
if anybody says that your mind is—is sometimes affected, you
know—it is unfair. I always say so and uphold it, because even if your
surface mind be a little affected (of course you will not feel angry with me
for talking so—I am speaking from a higher point of view) yet your real
mind is far better than all theirs put together. Such a mind as they have never
even <i>dreamed</i> of; because really, there are <i>two</i> minds—the
kind that matters, and the kind that doesn’t matter. Isn’t it
so?”
</p>

<p>
“May be! may be so!” said the prince, faintly; his heart was
beating painfully.
</p>

<p>
“I knew you would not misunderstand me,” she said, triumphantly.
“Prince S. and Evgenie Pavlovitch and Alexandra don’t understand
anything about these two kinds of mind, but, just fancy, mamma does!”
</p>

<p>
“You are very like Lizabetha Prokofievna.”
</p>

<p>
“What! surely not?” said Aglaya.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, you are, indeed.”
</p>

<p>
“Thank you; I am glad to be like mamma,” she said, thoughtfully.
“You respect her very much, don’t you?” she added, quite
unconscious of the naiveness of the question.
</p>

<p>
“<i>Very</i> much; and I am so glad that you have realized the
fact.”
</p>

<p>
“I am very glad, too, because she is often laughed at by people. But
listen to the chief point. I have long thought over the matter, and at last I
have chosen you. I don’t wish people to laugh at me; I don’t wish
people to think me a ‘little fool.’ I don’t want to be
chaffed. I felt all this of a sudden, and I refused Evgenie Pavlovitch flatly,
because I am not going to be forever thrown at people’s heads to be
married. I want—I want—well, I’ll tell you, I wish to run
away from home, and I have chosen you to help me.”
</p>

<p>
“Run away from home?” cried the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Yes—yes—yes! Run away from home!” she repeated, in a
transport of rage. “I won’t, I won’t be made to blush every
minute by them all! I don’t want to blush before Prince S. or Evgenie
Pavlovitch, or anyone, and therefore I have chosen you. I shall tell you
everything, <i>everything</i>, even the most important things of all, whenever
I like, and you are to hide nothing from me on your side. I want to speak to at
least one person, as I would to myself. They have suddenly begun to say that I
am waiting for you, and in love with you. They began this before you arrived
here, and so I didn’t show them the letter, and now they all say it,
every one of them. I want to be brave, and be afraid of nobody. I don’t
want to go to their balls and things—I want to do good. I have long
desired to run away, for I have been kept shut up for twenty years, and they
are always trying to marry me off. I wanted to run away when I was fourteen
years old—I was a little fool then, I know—but now I have worked it
all out, and I have waited for you to tell me about foreign countries. I have
never seen a single Gothic cathedral. I must go to Rome; I must see all the
museums; I must study in Paris. All this last year I have been preparing and
reading forbidden books. Alexandra and Adelaida are allowed to read anything
they like, but I mayn’t. I don’t want to quarrel with my sisters,
but I told my parents long ago that I wish to change my social position. I have
decided to take up teaching, and I count on you because you said you loved
children. Can we go in for education together—if not at once, then
afterwards? We could do good together. I won’t be a general’s
daughter any more! Tell me, are you a very learned man?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh no; not at all.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh-h-h! I’m sorry for that. I thought you were. I wonder why I
always thought so—but at all events you’ll help me, won’t
you? Because I’ve chosen you, you know.”
</p>

<p>
“Aglaya Ivanovna, it’s absurd.”
</p>

<p>
“But I will, I <i>will</i> run away!” she cried—and her eyes
flashed again with anger—“and if you don’t agree I shall go
and marry Gavrila Ardalionovitch! I won’t be considered a horrible girl,
and accused of goodness knows what.”
</p>

<p>
“Are you out of your mind?” cried the prince, almost starting from
his seat. “What do they accuse you of? Who accuses you?”
</p>

<p>
“At home, everybody, mother, my sisters, Prince S., even that detestable
Colia! If they don’t say it, they think it. I told them all so to their
faces. I told mother and father and everybody. Mamma was ill all the day after
it, and next day father and Alexandra told me that I didn’t understand
what nonsense I was talking. I informed them that they little knew me—I
was not a small child—I understood every word in the language—that
I had read a couple of Paul de Kok’s novels two years since on purpose,
so as to know all about everything. No sooner did mamma hear me say this than
she nearly fainted!”
</p>

<p>
A strange thought passed through the prince’s brain; he gazed intently at
Aglaya and smiled.
</p>

<p>
He could not believe that this was the same haughty young girl who had once so
proudly shown him Gania’s letter. He could not understand how that proud
and austere beauty could show herself to be such an utter child—a child
who probably did not even now understand some words.
</p>

<p>
“Have you always lived at home, Aglaya Ivanovna?” he asked.
“I mean, have you never been to school, or college, or anything?”
</p>

<p>
“No—never—nowhere! I’ve been at home all my life,
corked up in a bottle; and they expect me to be married straight out of it.
What are you laughing at again? I observe that you, too, have taken to laughing
at me, and range yourself on their side against me,” she added, frowning
angrily. “Don’t irritate me—I’m bad enough without
that—I don’t know what I am doing sometimes. I am persuaded that
you came here today in the full belief that I am in love with you, and that I
arranged this meeting because of that,” she cried, with annoyance.
</p>

<p>
“I admit I was afraid that that was the case, yesterday,” blundered
the prince (he was rather confused), “but today I am quite convinced
that—”
</p>

<p>
“How?” cried Aglaya—and her lower lip trembled violently.
“You were <i>afraid</i> that I—you dared to think that I—good
gracious! you suspected, perhaps, that I sent for you to come here in order to
catch you in a trap, so that they should find us here together, and make you
marry me—”
</p>

<p>
“Aglaya Ivanovna, aren’t you ashamed of saying such a thing? How
could such a horrible idea enter your sweet, innocent heart? I am certain you
don’t believe a word of what you say, and probably you don’t even
know what you are talking about.”
</p>

<p>
Aglaya sat with her eyes on the ground; she seemed to have alarmed even herself
by what she had said.
</p>

<p>
“No, I’m not; I’m not a bit ashamed!” she murmured.
“And how do you know my heart is innocent? And how dared you send me a
love-letter that time?”
</p>

<p>
“<i>Love-letter?</i> My letter a love-letter? That letter was the most
respectful of letters; it went straight from my heart, at what was perhaps the
most painful moment of my life! I thought of you at the time as a kind of
light. I—”
</p>

<p>
“Well, very well, very well!” she said, but quite in a different
tone. She was remorseful now, and bent forward to touch his shoulder, though
still trying not to look him in the face, as if the more persuasively to beg
him not to be angry with her. “Very well,” she continued, looking
thoroughly ashamed of herself, “I feel that I said a very foolish thing.
I only did it just to try you. Take it as unsaid, and if I offended you,
forgive me. Don’t look straight at me like that, please; turn your head
away. You called it a ‘horrible idea’; I only said it to shock you.
Very often I am myself afraid of saying what I intend to say, and out it comes
all the same. You have just told me that you wrote that letter at the most
painful moment of your life. I know what moment that was!” she added
softly, looking at the ground again.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, if you could know all!”
</p>

<p>
“I <i>do</i> know all!” she cried, with another burst of
indignation. “You were living in the same house as that horrible woman
with whom you ran away.” She did not blush as she said this; on the
contrary, she grew pale, and started from her seat, apparently oblivious of
what she did, and immediately sat down again. Her lip continued to tremble for
a long time.
</p>

<p>
There was silence for a moment. The prince was taken aback by the suddenness of
this last reply, and did not know to what he should attribute it.
</p>

<p>
“I don’t love you a bit!” she said suddenly, just as though
the words had exploded from her mouth.
</p>

<p>
The prince did not answer, and there was silence again. “I love Gavrila
Ardalionovitch,” she said, quickly; but hardly audibly, and with her head
bent lower than ever.
</p>

<p>
“That is <i>not</i> true,” said the prince, in an equally low
voice.
</p>

<p>
“What! I tell stories, do I? It is true! I gave him my promise a couple
of days ago on this very seat.”
</p>

<p>
The prince was startled, and reflected for a moment.
</p>

<p>
“It is not true,” he repeated, decidedly; “you have just
invented it!”
</p>

<p>
“You are wonderfully polite. You know he is greatly improved. He loves me
better than his life. He let his hand burn before my very eyes in order to
prove to me that he loved me better than his life!”
</p>

<p>
“He burned his hand!”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, believe it or not! It’s all the same to me!”
</p>

<p>
The prince sat silent once more. Aglaya did not seem to be joking; she was too
angry for that.
</p>

<p>
“What! he brought a candle with him to this place? That is, if the
episode happened here; otherwise I can’t.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, a candle! What’s there improbable about that?”
</p>

<p>
“A whole one, and in a candlestick?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes—no—half a candle—an end, you know—no, it was
a whole candle; it’s all the same. Be quiet, can’t you! He brought
a box of matches too, if you like, and then lighted the candle and held his
finger in it for half an hour and more!—There! Can’t that
be?”
</p>

<p>
“I saw him yesterday, and his fingers were all right!”
</p>

<p>
Aglaya suddenly burst out laughing, as simply as a child.
</p>

<p>
“Do you know why I have just told you these lies?” She appealed to
the prince, of a sudden, with the most childlike candour, and with the laugh
still trembling on her lips. “Because when one tells a lie, if one
insists on something unusual and eccentric—something too ‘out of
the way’ for anything, you know—the more impossible the thing is,
the more plausible does the lie sound. I’ve noticed this. But I managed
it badly; I didn’t know how to work it.” She suddenly frowned again
at this point as though at some sudden unpleasant recollection.
</p>

<p>
“If”—she began, looking seriously and even sadly at
him—“if when I read you all that about the ‘poor
knight,’ I wished to-to praise you for one thing—I also wished to
show you that I knew all—and did not approve of your conduct.”
</p>

<p>
“You are very unfair to me, and to that unfortunate woman of whom you
spoke just now in such dreadful terms, Aglaya.”
</p>

<p>
“Because I know all, all—and that is why I speak so. I know very
well how you—half a year since—offered her your hand before
everybody. Don’t interrupt me. You see, I am merely stating facts without
any comment upon them. After that she ran away with Rogojin. Then you lived
with her at some village or town, and she ran away from you.” (Aglaya
blushed dreadfully.) “Then she returned to Rogojin again, who loves her
like a madman. Then you—like a wise man as you are—came back here
after her as soon as ever you heard that she had returned to Petersburg.
Yesterday evening you sprang forward to protect her, and just now you dreamed
about her. You see, I know all. You did come back here for her, for
her—now didn’t you?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes—for her!” said the prince softly and sadly, and bending
his head down, quite unconscious of the fact that Aglaya was gazing at him with
eyes which burned like live coals. “I came to find out something—I
don’t believe in her future happiness as Rogojin’s wife,
although—in a word, I did not know how to help her or what to do for
her—but I came, on the chance.”
</p>

<p>
He glanced at Aglaya, who was listening with a look of hatred on her face.
</p>

<p>
“If you came without knowing why, I suppose you love her very much
indeed!” she said at last.
</p>

<p>
“No,” said the prince, “no, I do not love her. Oh! if you
only knew with what horror I recall the time I spent with her!”
</p>

<p>
A shudder seemed to sweep over his whole body at the recollection.
</p>

<p>
“Tell me about it,” said Aglaya.
</p>

<p>
“There is nothing which you might not hear. Why I should wish to tell
you, and only you, this experience of mine, I really cannot say; perhaps it
really is because I love you very much. This unhappy woman is persuaded that
she is the most hopeless, fallen creature in the world. Oh, do not condemn her!
Do not cast stones at her! She has suffered too much already in the
consciousness of her own undeserved shame.
</p>

<p>
“And she is not guilty—oh God!—Every moment she bemoans and
bewails herself, and cries out that she does not admit any guilt, that she is
the victim of circumstances—the victim of a wicked libertine.
</p>

<p>
“But whatever she may say, remember that she does not believe it
herself,—remember that she will believe nothing but that she is a guilty
creature.
</p>

<p>
“When I tried to rid her soul of this gloomy fallacy, she suffered so
terribly that my heart will never be quite at peace so long as I can remember
that dreadful time!—Do you know why she left me? Simply to prove to me
what is not true—that she is base. But the worst of it is, she did not
realize herself that that was all she wanted to prove by her departure! She
went away in response to some inner prompting to do something disgraceful, in
order that she might say to herself—‘There—you’ve done
a new act of shame—you degraded creature!’
</p>

<p>
“Oh, Aglaya—perhaps you cannot understand all this. Try to realize
that in the perpetual admission of guilt she probably finds some dreadful
unnatural satisfaction—as though she were revenging herself upon someone.
</p>

<p>
“Now and then I was able to persuade her almost to see light around her
again; but she would soon fall, once more, into her old tormenting delusions,
and would go so far as to reproach me for placing myself on a pedestal above
her (I never had an idea of such a thing!), and informed me, in reply to my
proposal of marriage, that she ‘did not want condescending sympathy or
help from anybody.’ You saw her last night. You don’t suppose she
can be happy among such people as those—you cannot suppose that such
society is fit for her? You have no idea how well-educated she is, and what an
intellect she has! She astonished me sometimes.”
</p>

<p>
“And you preached her sermons there, did you?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh no,” continued the prince thoughtfully, not noticing
Aglaya’s mocking tone, “I was almost always silent there. I often
wished to speak, but I really did not know what to say. In some cases it is
best to say nothing, I think. I loved her, yes, I loved her very much indeed;
but afterwards—afterwards she guessed all.”
</p>

<p>
“What did she guess?”
</p>

<p>
“That I only <i>pitied</i> her—and—and loved her no
longer!”
</p>

<p>
“How do you know that? How do you know that she is not really in love
with that—that rich cad—the man she eloped with?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh no! I know she only laughs at him; she has made a fool of him all
along.”
</p>

<p>
“Has she never laughed at you?”
</p>

<p>
“No—in anger, perhaps. Oh yes! she reproached me dreadfully in
anger; and suffered herself, too! But afterwards—oh! don’t remind
me—don’t remind me of that!”
</p>

<p>
He hid his face in his hands.
</p>

<p>
“Are you aware that she writes to me almost every day?”
</p>

<p>
“So that is true, is it?” cried the prince, greatly agitated.
“I had heard a report of it, but would not believe it.”
</p>

<p>
“Whom did you hear it from?” asked Aglaya, alarmed. “Rogojin
said something about it yesterday, but nothing definite.”
</p>

<p>
“Yesterday! Morning or evening? Before the music or after?”
</p>

<p>
“After—it was about twelve o’clock.”
</p>

<p>
“Ah! Well, if it was Rogojin—but do you know what she writes to me
about?”
</p>

<p>
“I should not be surprised by anything. She is mad!”
</p>

<p>
“There are the letters.” (Aglaya took three letters out of her
pocket and threw them down before the prince.) “For a whole week she has
been entreating and worrying and persuading me to marry you. She—well,
she is clever, though she may be mad—much cleverer than I am, as you say.
Well, she writes that she is in love with me herself, and tries to see me every
day, if only from a distance. She writes that you love me, and that she has
long known it and seen it, and that you and she talked about me—there.
She wishes to see you happy, and she says that she is certain only I can ensure
you the happiness you deserve. She writes such strange, wild letters—I
haven’t shown them to anyone. Now, do you know what all this means? Can
you guess anything?”
</p>

<p>
“It is madness—it is merely another proof of her insanity!”
said the prince, and his lips trembled.
</p>

<p>
“You are crying, aren’t you?”
</p>

<p>
“No, Aglaya. No, I’m not crying.” The prince looked at her.
</p>

<p>
“Well, what am I to do? What do you advise me? I cannot go on receiving
these letters, you know.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, let her alone, I entreat you!” cried the prince. “What
can you do in this dark, gloomy mystery? Let her alone, and I’ll use all
my power to prevent her writing you any more letters.”
</p>

<p>
“If so, you are a heartless man!” cried Aglaya. “As if you
can’t see that it is not myself she loves, but you, you, and only you!
Surely you have not remarked everything else in her, and only not <i>this?</i>
Do you know what these letters mean? They mean jealousy, sir—nothing but
pure jealousy! She—do you think she will ever really marry this Rogojin,
as she says here she will? She would take her own life the day after you and I
were married.”
</p>

<p>
The prince shuddered; his heart seemed to freeze within him. He gazed at Aglaya
in wonderment; it was difficult for him to realize that this child was also a
woman.
</p>

<p>
“God knows, Aglaya, that to restore her peace of mind and make her happy
I would willingly give up my life. But I cannot love her, and she knows
that.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, make a sacrifice of yourself! That sort of thing becomes you well,
you know. Why not do it? And don’t call me ‘Aglaya’; you have
done it several times lately. You are bound, it is your <i>duty</i> to
‘raise’ her; you must go off somewhere again to soothe and pacify
her. Why, you love her, you know!”
</p>

<p>
“I cannot sacrifice myself so, though I admit I did wish to do so once.
Who knows, perhaps I still wish to! But I know for <i>certain</i>, that if she
married me it would be her ruin; I know this and therefore I leave her alone. I
ought to go to see her today; now I shall probably not go. She is proud, she
would never forgive me the nature of the love I bear her, and we should both be
ruined. This may be unnatural, I don’t know; but everything seems
unnatural. You say she loves me, as if this were <i>love!</i> As if she could
love <i>me</i>, after what I have been through! No, no, it is not love.”
</p>

<p>
“How pale you have grown!” cried Aglaya in alarm.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, it’s nothing. I haven’t slept, that’s all, and
I’m rather tired. I—we certainly did talk about you, Aglaya.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, indeed, it is true then! <i>You could actually talk about me with
her</i>; and—and how could you have been fond of me when you had only
seen me once?”
</p>

<p>
“I don’t know. Perhaps it was that I seemed to come upon light in
the midst of my gloom. I told you the truth when I said I did not know why I
thought of you before all others. Of course it was all a sort of dream, a dream
amidst the horrors of reality. Afterwards I began to work. I did not intend to
come back here for two or three years—”
</p>

<p>
“Then you came for her sake?” Aglaya’s voice trembled.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I came for her sake.”
</p>

<p>
There was a moment or two of gloomy silence. Aglaya rose from her seat.
</p>

<p>
“If you say,” she began in shaky tones, “if you say that this
woman of yours is mad—at all events I have nothing to do with her insane
fancies. Kindly take these three letters, Lef Nicolaievitch, and throw them
back to her, from me. And if she dares,” cried Aglaya suddenly, much
louder than before, “if she dares so much as write me one word again,
tell her I shall tell my father, and that she shall be taken to a lunatic
asylum.”
</p>

<p>
The prince jumped up in alarm at Aglaya’s sudden wrath, and a mist seemed
to come before his eyes.
</p>

<p>
“You cannot really feel like that! You don’t mean what you say. It
is not true,” he murmured.
</p>

<p>
“It <i>is</i> true, it <i>is</i> true,” cried Aglaya, almost beside
herself with rage.
</p>

<p>
“What’s true? What’s all this? What’s true?” said
an alarmed voice just beside them.
</p>

<p>
Before them stood Lizabetha Prokofievna.
</p>

<p>
“Why, it’s true that I am going to marry Gavrila Ardalionovitch,
that I love him and intend to elope with him tomorrow,” cried Aglaya,
turning upon her mother. “Do you hear? Is your curiosity satisfied? Are
you pleased with what you have heard?”
</p>

<p>
Aglaya rushed away homewards with these words.
</p>

<p>
“H’m! well, <i>you</i> are not going away just yet, my friend, at
all events,” said Lizabetha, stopping the prince. “Kindly step home
with me, and let me have a little explanation of the mystery. Nice goings on,
these! I haven’t slept a wink all night as it is.”
</p>

<p>
The prince followed her.
</p>

<h3>IX.</h3>

<p>
Arrived at her house, Lizabetha Prokofievna paused in the first room. She could
go no farther, and subsided on to a couch quite exhausted; too feeble to
remember so much as to ask the prince to take a seat. This was a large
reception-room, full of flowers, and with a glass door leading into the garden.
</p>

<p>
Alexandra and Adelaida came in almost immediately, and looked inquiringly at
the prince and their mother.
</p>

<p>
The girls generally rose at about nine in the morning in the country; Aglaya,
of late, had been in the habit of getting up rather earlier and having a walk
in the garden, but not at seven o’clock; about eight or a little later
was her usual time.
</p>

<p>
Lizabetha Prokofievna, who really had not slept all night, rose at about eight
on purpose to meet Aglaya in the garden and walk with her; but she could not
find her either in the garden or in her own room.
</p>

<p>
This agitated the old lady considerably; and she awoke her other daughters.
Next, she learned from the maid that Aglaya had gone into the park before seven
o’clock. The sisters made a joke of Aglaya’s last freak, and told
their mother that if she went into the park to look for her, Aglaya would
probably be very angry with her, and that she was pretty sure to be sitting
reading on the green bench that she had talked of two or three days since, and
about which she had nearly quarrelled with Prince S., who did not see anything
particularly lovely in it.
</p>

<p>
Arrived at the rendezvous of the prince and her daughter, and hearing the
strange words of the latter, Lizabetha Prokofievna had been dreadfully alarmed,
for many reasons. However, now that she had dragged the prince home with her,
she began to feel a little frightened at what she had undertaken. Why should
not Aglaya meet the prince in the park and have a talk with him, even if such a
meeting should be by appointment?
</p>

<p>
“Don’t suppose, prince,” she began, bracing herself up for
the effort, “don’t suppose that I have brought you here to ask
questions. After last night, I assure you, I am not so exceedingly anxious to
see you at all; I could have postponed the pleasure for a long while.”
She paused.
</p>

<p>
“But at the same time you would be very glad to know how I happened to
meet Aglaya Ivanovna this morning?” The prince finished her speech for
her with the utmost composure.
</p>

<p>
“Well, what then? Supposing I should like to know?” cried Lizabetha
Prokofievna, blushing. “I’m sure I am not afraid of plain speaking.
I’m not offending anyone, and I never wish to, and—”
</p>

<p>
“Pardon me, it is no offence to wish to know this; you are her mother. We
met at the green bench this morning, punctually at seven
o’clock,—according to an agreement made by Aglaya Ivanovna with
myself yesterday. She said that she wished to see me and speak to me about
something important. We met and conversed for an hour about matters concerning
Aglaya Ivanovna herself, and that’s all.”
</p>

<p>
“Of course it is all, my friend. I don’t doubt you for a
moment,” said Lizabetha Prokofievna with dignity.
</p>

<p>
“Well done, prince, capital!” cried Aglaya, who entered the room at
this moment. “Thank you for assuming that I would not demean myself with
lies. Come, is that enough, mamma, or do you intend to put any more
questions?”
</p>

<p>
“You know I have never needed to blush before you, up to this day, though
perhaps you would have been glad enough to make me,” said Lizabetha
Prokofievna,—with majesty. “Good-bye, prince; forgive me for
bothering you. I trust you will rest assured of my unalterable esteem for
you.”
</p>

<p>
The prince made his bows and retired at once. Alexandra and Adelaida smiled and
whispered to each other, while Lizabetha Prokofievna glared severely at them.
“We are only laughing at the prince’s beautiful bows, mamma,”
said Adelaida. “Sometimes he bows just like a meal-sack, but to-day he
was like—like Evgenie Pavlovitch!”
</p>

<p>
“It is the <i>heart</i> which is the best teacher of refinement and
dignity, not the dancing-master,” said her mother, sententiously, and
departed upstairs to her own room, not so much as glancing at Aglaya.
</p>

<p>
When the prince reached home, about nine o’clock, he found Vera Lebedeff
and the maid on the verandah. They were both busy trying to tidy up the place
after last night’s disorderly party.
</p>

<p>
“Thank goodness, we’ve just managed to finish it before you came
in!” said Vera, joyfully.
</p>

<p>
“Good-morning! My head whirls so; I didn’t sleep all night. I
should like to have a nap now.”
</p>

<p>
“Here, on the verandah? Very well, I’ll tell them all not to come
and wake you. Papa has gone out somewhere.”
</p>

<p>
The servant left the room. Vera was about to follow her, but returned and
approached the prince with a preoccupied air.
</p>

<p>
“Prince!” she said, “have pity on that poor boy; don’t
turn him out today.”
</p>

<p>
“Not for the world; he shall do just as he likes.”
</p>

<p>
“He won’t do any harm now; and—and don’t be too severe
with him.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh dear no! Why—”
</p>

<p>
“And—and you won’t <i>laugh</i> at him? That’s the
chief thing.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh no! Never.”
</p>

<p>
“How foolish I am to speak of such things to a man like you,” said
Vera, blushing. “Though you <i>do</i> look tired,” she added, half
turning away, “your eyes are so splendid at this moment—so full of
happiness.”
</p>

<p>
“Really?” asked the prince, gleefully, and he laughed in delight.
</p>

<p>
But Vera, simple-minded little girl that she was (just like a boy, in fact),
here became dreadfully confused, of a sudden, and ran hastily out of the room,
laughing and blushing.
</p>

<p>
“What a dear little thing she is,” thought the prince, and
immediately forgot all about her.
</p>

<p>
He walked to the far end of the verandah, where the sofa stood, with a table in
front of it. Here he sat down and covered his face with his hands, and so
remained for ten minutes. Suddenly he put his hand in his coat-pocket and
hurriedly produced three letters.
</p>

<p>
But the door opened again, and out came Colia.
</p>

<p>
The prince actually felt glad that he had been interrupted,—and might
return the letters to his pocket. He was glad of the respite.
</p>

<p>
“Well,” said Colia, plunging <i>in medias res</i>, as he always
did, “here’s a go! What do you think of Hippolyte now? Don’t
respect him any longer, eh?”
</p>

<p>
“Why not? But look here, Colia, I’m tired; besides, the subject is
too melancholy to begin upon again. How is he, though?”
</p>

<p>
“Asleep—he’ll sleep for a couple of hours yet. I quite
understand—you haven’t slept—you walked about the park, I
know. Agitation—excitement—all that sort of thing—quite
natural, too!”
</p>

<p>
“How do you know I walked in the park and didn’t sleep at
home?”
</p>

<p>
“Vera just told me. She tried to persuade me not to come, but I
couldn’t help myself, just for one minute. I have been having my turn at
the bedside for the last two hours; Kostia Lebedeff is there now. Burdovsky has
gone. Now, lie down, prince, make yourself comfortable, and sleep well!
I’m awfully impressed, you know.”
</p>

<p>
“Naturally, all this—”
</p>

<p>
“No, no, I mean with the ‘explanation,’ especially that part
of it where he talks about Providence and a future life. There is a gigantic
thought there.”
</p>

<p>
The prince gazed affectionately at Colia, who, of course, had come in solely
for the purpose of talking about this “gigantic thought.”
</p>

<p>
“But it is not any one particular thought, only; it is the general
circumstances of the case. If Voltaire had written this now, or Rousseau, I
should have just read it and thought it remarkable, but should not have been so
<i>impressed</i> by it. But a man who knows for certain that he has but ten
minutes to live and can talk like
that—why—it’s—it’s <i>pride</i>, that is! It is
really a most extraordinary, exalted assertion of personal dignity,
it’s—it’s <i>defiant!</i> What a <i>gigantic</i> strength of
will, eh? And to accuse a fellow like that of not putting in the cap on
purpose; it’s base and mean! You know he deceived us last night, the
cunning rascal. I never packed his bag for him, and I never saw his pistol. He
packed it himself. But he put me off my guard like that, you see. Vera says you
are going to let him stay on; I swear there’s no danger, especially as we
are always with him.”
</p>

<p>
“Who was by him at night?”
</p>

<p>
“I, and Burdovsky, and Kostia Lebedeff. Keller stayed a little while, and
then went over to Lebedeff’s to sleep. Ferdishenko slept at
Lebedeff’s, too; but he went away at seven o’clock. My father is
always at Lebedeff’s; but he has gone out just now. I dare say Lebedeff
will be coming in here directly; he has been looking for you; I don’t
know what he wants. Shall we let him in or not, if you are asleep? I’m
going to have a nap, too. By-the-by, such a curious thing happened. Burdovsky
woke me at seven, and I met my father just outside the room, so drunk, he
didn’t even know me. He stood before me like a log, and when he recovered
himself, asked hurriedly how Hippolyte was. ‘Yes,’ he said, when I
told him, ‘that’s all very well, but I <i>really</i> came to warn
you that you must be very careful what you say before Ferdishenko.’ Do
you follow me, prince?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes. Is it really so? However, it’s all the same to us, of
course.”
</p>

<p>
“Of course it is; we are not a secret society; and that being the case,
it is all the more curious that the general should have been on his way to wake
me up in order to tell me this.”
</p>

<p>
“Ferdishenko has gone, you say?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, he went at seven o’clock. He came into the room on his way
out; I was watching just then. He said he was going to spend ‘the rest of
the night’ at Wilkin’s; there’s a tipsy fellow, a friend of
his, of that name. Well, I’m off. Oh, here’s Lebedeff himself! The
prince wants to go to sleep, Lukian Timofeyovitch, so you may just go away
again.”
</p>

<p>
“One moment, my dear prince, just one. I must absolutely speak to you
about something which is most grave,” said Lebedeff, mysteriously and
solemnly, entering the room with a bow and looking extremely important. He had
but just returned, and carried his hat in his hand. He looked preoccupied and
most unusually dignified.
</p>

<p>
The prince begged him to take a chair.
</p>

<p>
“I hear you have called twice; I suppose you are still worried about
yesterday’s affair.”
</p>

<p>
“What, about that boy, you mean? Oh dear no, yesterday my ideas were a
little—well—mixed. Today, I assure you, I shall not oppose in the
slightest degree any suggestions it may please you to make.”
</p>

<p>
“What’s up with you this morning, Lebedeff? You look so important
and dignified, and you choose your words so carefully,” said the prince,
smiling.
</p>

<p>
“Nicolai Ardalionovitch!” said Lebedeff, in a most amiable tone of
voice, addressing the boy. “As I have a communication to make to the
prince which concerns only myself—”
</p>

<p>
“Of course, of course, not my affair. All right,” said Colia, and
away he went.
</p>

<p>
“I love that boy for his perception,” said Lebedeff, looking after
him. “My dear prince,” he continued, “I have had a terrible
misfortune, either last night or early this morning. I cannot tell the exact
time.”
</p>

<p>
“What is it?”
</p>

<p>
“I have lost four hundred roubles out of my side pocket! They’re
gone!” said Lebedeff, with a sour smile.
</p>

<p>
“You’ve lost four hundred roubles? Oh! I’m sorry for
that.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, it is serious for a poor man who lives by his toil.”
</p>

<p>
“Of course, of course! How was it?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, the wine is to blame, of course. I confess to you, prince, as I
would to Providence itself. Yesterday I received four hundred roubles from a
debtor at about five in the afternoon, and came down here by train. I had my
purse in my pocket. When I changed, I put the money into the pocket of my plain
clothes, intending to keep it by me, as I expected to have an applicant for it
in the evening.”
</p>

<p>
“It’s true then, Lebedeff, that you advertise to lend money on gold
or silver articles?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, through an agent. My own name doesn’t appear. I have a large
family, you see, and at a small percentage—”
</p>

<p>
“Quite so, quite so. I only asked for information—excuse the
question. Go on.”
</p>

<p>
“Well, meanwhile that sick boy was brought here, and those guests came
in, and we had tea, and—well, we made merry—to my ruin! Hearing of
your birthday afterwards, and excited with the circumstances of the evening, I
ran upstairs and changed my plain clothes once more for my uniform [Civil
Service clerks in Russia wear uniform.]—you must have noticed I had my
uniform on all the evening? Well, I forgot the money in the pocket of my old
coat—you know when God will ruin a man he first of all bereaves him of
his senses—and it was only this morning at half-past seven that I woke up
and grabbed at my coat pocket, first thing. The pocket was empty—the
purse gone, and not a trace to be found!”
</p>

<p>
“Dear me! This is very unpleasant!”
</p>

<p>
“Unpleasant! Indeed it is. You have found a very appropriate
expression,” said Lebedeff, politely, but with sarcasm.
</p>

<p>
“But what’s to be done? It’s a serious matter,” said
the prince, thoughtfully. “Don’t you think you may have dropped it
out of your pocket whilst intoxicated?”
</p>

<p>
“Certainly. Anything is possible when one is intoxicated, as you neatly
express it, prince. But consider—if I, intoxicated or not, dropped an
object out of my pocket on to the ground, that object ought to remain on the
ground. Where is the object, then?”
</p>

<p>
“Didn’t you put it away in some drawer, perhaps?”
</p>

<p>
“I’ve looked everywhere, and turned out everything.”
</p>

<p>
“I confess this disturbs me a good deal. Someone must have picked it up,
then.”
</p>

<p>
“Or taken it out of my pocket—two alternatives.”
</p>

<p>
“It is very distressing, because <i>who</i>—? That’s the
question!”
</p>

<p>
“Most undoubtedly, excellent prince, you have hit it—that is the
very question. How wonderfully you express the exact situation in a few
words!”
</p>

<p>
“Come, come, Lebedeff, no sarcasm! It’s a serious—”
</p>

<p>
“Sarcasm!” cried Lebedeff, wringing his hands. “All right,
all right, I’m not angry. I’m only put out about this. Whom do you
suspect?”
</p>

<p>
“That is a very difficult and complicated question. I cannot suspect the
servant, for she was in the kitchen the whole evening, nor do I suspect any of
my children.”
</p>

<p>
“I should think not. Go on.”
</p>

<p>
“Then it must be one of the guests.”
</p>

<p>
“Is such a thing possible?”
</p>

<p>
“Absolutely and utterly impossible—and yet, so it must be. But one
thing I am sure of, if it be a theft, it was committed, not in the evening when
we were all together, but either at night or early in the morning; therefore,
by one of those who slept here. Burdovsky and Colia I except, of course. They
did not even come into my room.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, or even if they had! But who did sleep with you?”
</p>

<p>
“Four of us, including myself, in two rooms. The general, myself, Keller,
and Ferdishenko. One of us four it must have been. I don’t suspect
myself, though such cases have been known.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh! <i>do</i> go on, Lebedeff! Don’t drag it out so.”
</p>

<p>
“Well, there are three left, then—Keller firstly. He is a drunkard
to begin with, and a liberal (in the sense of other people’s pockets),
otherwise with more of the ancient knight about him than of the modern liberal.
He was with the sick man at first, but came over afterwards because there was
no place to lie down in the room and the floor was so hard.”
</p>

<p>
“You suspect him?”
</p>

<p>
“I <i>did</i> suspect him. When I woke up at half-past seven and tore my
hair in despair for my loss and carelessness, I awoke the general, who was
sleeping the sleep of innocence near me. Taking into consideration the sudden
disappearance of Ferdishenko, which was suspicious in itself, we decided to
search Keller, who was lying there sleeping like a top. Well, we searched his
clothes thoroughly, and not a farthing did we find; in fact, his pockets all
had holes in them. We found a dirty handkerchief, and a love-letter from some
scullery-maid. The general decided that he was innocent. We awoke him for
further inquiries, and had the greatest difficulty in making him understand
what was up. He opened his mouth and stared—he looked so stupid and so
absurdly innocent. It wasn’t Keller.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, I’m so glad!” said the prince, joyfully. “I was so
afraid.”
</p>

<p>
“Afraid! Then you had some grounds for supposing he might be the
culprit?” said Lebedeff, frowning.
</p>

<p>
“Oh no—not a bit! It was foolish of me to say I was afraid!
Don’t repeat it please, Lebedeff, don’t tell anyone I said
that!”
</p>

<p>
“My dear prince! your words lie in the lowest depth of my heart—it
is their tomb!” said Lebedeff, solemnly, pressing his hat to the region
of his heart.
</p>

<p>
“Thanks; very well. Then I suppose it’s Ferdishenko; that is, I
mean, you suspect Ferdishenko?”
</p>

<p>
“Whom else?” said Lebedeff, softly, gazing intently into the prince
s face.
</p>

<p>
“Of course—quite so, whom else? But what are the proofs?”
</p>

<p>
“We have evidence. In the first place, his mysterious disappearance at
seven o’clock, or even earlier.”
</p>

<p>
“I know, Colia told me that he had said he was off to—I forget the
name, some friend of his, to finish the night.”
</p>

<p>
“H’m! then Colia has spoken to you already?”
</p>

<p>
“Not about the theft.”
</p>

<p>
“He does not know of it; I have kept it a secret. Very well, Ferdishenko
went off to Wilkin’s. That is not so curious in itself, but here the
evidence opens out further. He left his address, you see, when he went. Now
prince, consider, why did he leave his address? Why do you suppose he went out
of his way to tell Colia that he had gone to Wilkin’s? Who cared to know
that he was going to Wilkin’s? No, no! prince, this is finesse,
thieves’ finesse! This is as good as saying, ‘There, how can I be a
thief when I leave my address? I’m not concealing my movements as a thief
would.’ Do you understand, prince?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh yes, but that is not enough.”
</p>

<p>
“Second proof. The scent turns out to be false, and the address given is
a sham. An hour after—that is at about eight, I went to Wilkin’s
myself, and there was no trace of Ferdishenko. The maid did tell me, certainly,
that an hour or so since someone had been hammering at the door, and had
smashed the bell; she said she would not open the door because she didn’t
want to wake her master; probably she was too lazy to get up herself. Such
phenomena are met with occasionally!”
</p>

<p>
“But is that all your evidence? It is not enough!”
</p>

<p>
“Well, prince, whom are we to suspect, then? Consider!” said
Lebedeff with almost servile amiability, smiling at the prince. There was a
look of cunning in his eyes, however.
</p>

<p>
“You should search your room and all the cupboards again,” said the
prince, after a moment or two of silent reflection.
</p>

<p>
“But I have done so, my dear prince!” said Lebedeff, more sweetly
than ever.
</p>

<p>
“H’m! why must you needs go up and change your coat like
that?” asked the prince, banging the table with his fist, in annoyance.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, don’t be so worried on my account, prince! I assure you I am
not worth it! At least, not I alone. But I see you are suffering on behalf of
the criminal too, for wretched Ferdishenko, in fact!”
</p>

<p>
“Of course you have given me a disagreeable enough thing to think
about,” said the prince, irritably, “but what are you going to do,
since you are so sure it was Ferdishenko?”
</p>

<p>
“But who else <i>could</i> it be, my very dear prince?” repeated
Lebedeff, as sweet as sugar again. “If you don’t wish me to suspect
Mr. Burdovsky?”
</p>

<p>
“Of course not.”
</p>

<p>
“Nor the general? Ha, ha, ha!”
</p>

<p>
“Nonsense!” said the prince, angrily, turning round upon him.
</p>

<p>
“Quite so, nonsense! Ha, ha, ha! dear me! He did amuse me, did the
general! We went off on the hot scent to Wilkin’s together, you know; but
I must first observe that the general was even more thunderstruck than I myself
this morning, when I awoke him after discovering the theft; so much so that his
very face changed—he grew red and then pale, and at length flew into a
paroxysm of such noble wrath that I assure you I was quite surprised! He is a
most generous-hearted man! He tells lies by the thousands, I know, but it is
merely a weakness; he is a man of the highest feelings; a simple-minded man
too, and a man who carries the conviction of innocence in his very appearance.
I love that man, sir; I may have told you so before; it is a weakness of mine.
Well—he suddenly stopped in the middle of the road, opened out his coat
and bared his breast. ‘Search me,’ he says, ‘you searched
Keller; why don’t you search me too? It is only fair!’ says he. And
all the while his legs and hands were trembling with anger, and he as white as
a sheet all over! So I said to him, ‘Nonsense, general; if anybody but
yourself had said that to me, I’d have taken my head, my own head, and
put it on a large dish and carried it round to anyone who suspected you; and I
should have said: “There, you see that head? It’s my head, and
I’ll go bail with that head for him! Yes, and walk through the fire for
him, too.” There,’ says I, ‘that’s how I’d answer
for you, general!’ Then he embraced me, in the middle of the street, and
hugged me so tight (crying over me all the while) that I coughed fit to choke!
‘You are the one friend left to me amid all my misfortunes,’ says
he. Oh, he’s a man of sentiment, that! He went on to tell me a story of
how he had been accused, or suspected, of stealing five hundred thousand
roubles once, as a young man; and how, the very next day, he had rushed into a
burning, blazing house and saved the very count who suspected him, and Nina
Alexandrovna (who was then a young girl), from a fiery death. The count
embraced him, and that was how he came to marry Nina Alexandrovna, he said. As
for the money, it was found among the ruins next day in an English iron box
with a secret lock; it had got under the floor somehow, and if it had not been
for the fire it would never have been found! The whole thing is, of course, an
absolute fabrication, though when he spoke of Nina Alexandrovna he wept!
She’s a grand woman, is Nina Alexandrovna, though she is very angry with
me!”
</p>

<p>
“Are you acquainted with her?”
</p>

<p>
“Well, hardly at all. I wish I were, if only for the sake of justifying
myself in her eyes. Nina Alexandrovna has a grudge against me for, as she
thinks, encouraging her husband in drinking; whereas in reality I not only do
not encourage him, but I actually keep him out of harm’s way, and out of
bad company. Besides, he’s my friend, prince, so that I shall not lose
sight of him, again. Where he goes, I go. He’s quite given up visiting
the captain’s widow, though sometimes he thinks sadly of her, especially
in the morning, when he’s putting on his boots. I don’t know why
it’s at that time. But he has no money, and it’s no use his going
to see her without. Has he borrowed any money from you, prince?”
</p>

<p>
“No, he has not.”
</p>

<p>
“Ah, he’s ashamed to! He <i>meant</i> to ask you, I know, for he
said so. I suppose he thinks that as you gave him some once (you remember), you
would probably refuse if he asked you again.”
</p>

<p>
“Do you ever give him money?”
</p>

<p>
“Prince! Money! Why I would give that man not only my money, but my very
life, if he wanted it. Well, perhaps that’s exaggeration; not life,
we’ll say, but some illness, a boil or a bad cough, or anything of that
sort, I would stand with pleasure, for his sake; for I consider him a great man
fallen—money, indeed!”
</p>

<p>
“H’m, then you <i>do</i> give him money?”
</p>

<p>
“N-no, I have never given him money, and he knows well that I will never
give him any; because I am anxious to keep him out of intemperate ways. He is
going to town with me now; for you must know I am off to Petersburg after
Ferdishenko, while the scent is hot; I’m certain he is there. I shall let
the general go one way, while I go the other; we have so arranged matters in
order to pop out upon Ferdishenko, you see, from different sides. But I am
going to follow that naughty old general and catch him, I know where, at a
certain widow’s house; for I think it will be a good lesson, to put him
to shame by catching him with the widow.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, Lebedeff, don’t, don’t make any scandal about it!”
said the prince, much agitated, and speaking in a low voice.
</p>

<p>
“Not for the world, not for the world! I merely wish to make him ashamed
of himself. Oh, prince, great though this misfortune be to myself, I cannot
help thinking of his morals! I have a great favour to ask of you, esteemed
prince; I confess that it is the chief object of my visit. You know the
Ivolgins, you have even lived in their house; so if you would lend me your
help, honoured prince, in the general’s own interest and for his
good.”
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff clasped his hands in supplication.
</p>

<p>
“What help do you want from me? You may be certain that I am most anxious
to understand you, Lebedeff.”
</p>

<p>
“I felt sure of that, or I should not have come to you. We might manage
it with the help of Nina Alexandrovna, so that he might be closely watched in
his own house. Unfortunately I am not on terms... otherwise... but Nicolai
Ardalionovitch, who adores you with all his youthful soul, might help,
too.”
</p>

<p>
“No, no! Heaven forbid that we should bring Nina Alexandrovna into this
business! Or Colia, either. But perhaps I have not yet quite understood you,
Lebedeff?”
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff made an impatient movement.
</p>

<p>
“But there is nothing to understand! Sympathy and tenderness, that is
all—that is all our poor invalid requires! You will permit me to consider
him an invalid?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, it shows delicacy and intelligence on your part.”
</p>

<p>
“I will explain my idea by a practical example, to make it clearer. You
know the sort of man he is. At present his only failing is that he is crazy
about that captain’s widow, and he cannot go to her without money, and I
mean to catch him at her house today—for his own good; but supposing it
was not only the widow, but that he had committed a real crime, or at least
some very dishonourable action (of which he is, of course, incapable), I repeat
that even in that case, if he were treated with what I may call generous
tenderness, one could get at the whole truth, for he is very soft-hearted!
Believe me, he would betray himself before five days were out; he would burst
into tears, and make a clean breast of the matter; especially if managed with
tact, and if you and his family watched his every step, so to speak. Oh, my
dear prince,” Lebedeff added most emphatically, “I do not
positively assert that he has... I am ready, as the saying is, to shed my last
drop of blood for him this instant; but you will admit that debauchery,
drunkenness, and the captain’s widow, all these together may lead him
very far.”
</p>

<p>
“I am, of course, quite ready to add my efforts to yours in such a
case,” said the prince, rising; “but I confess, Lebedeff, that I am
terribly perplexed. Tell me, do you still think... plainly, you say yourself
that you suspect Mr. Ferdishenko?”
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff clasped his hands once more.
</p>

<p>
“Why, who else could I possibly suspect? Who else, most outspoken
prince?” he replied, with an unctuous smile.
</p>

<p>
Muishkin frowned, and rose from his seat.
</p>

<p>
“You see, Lebedeff, a mistake here would be a dreadful thing. This
Ferdishenko, I would not say a word against him, of course; but, who knows?
Perhaps it really was he? I mean he really does seem to be a more likely man
than... than any other.”
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff strained his eyes and ears to take in what the prince was saying. The
latter was frowning more and more, and walking excitedly up and down, trying
not to look at Lebedeff.
</p>

<p>
“You see,” he said, “I was given to understand that
Ferdishenko was that sort of man,—that one can’t say everything
before him. One has to take care not to say too much, you understand? I say
this to prove that he really is, so to speak, more likely to have done this
than anyone else, eh? You understand? The important thing is, not to make a
mistake.”
</p>

<p>
“And who told you this about Ferdishenko?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, I was told. Of course I don’t altogether believe it. I am very
sorry that I should have had to say this, because I assure you I don’t
believe it myself; it is all nonsense, of course. It was stupid of me to say
anything about it.”
</p>

<p>
“You see, it is very important, it is most important to know where you
got this report from,” said Lebedeff, excitedly. He had risen from his
seat, and was trying to keep step with the prince, running after him, up and
down. “Because look here, prince, I don’t mind telling you now that
as we were going along to Wilkin’s this morning, after telling me what
you know about the fire, and saving the count and all that, the general was
pleased to drop certain hints to the same effect about Ferdishenko, but so
vaguely and clumsily that I thought better to put a few questions to him on the
matter, with the result that I found the whole thing was an invention of his
excellency’s own mind. Of course, he only lies with the best intentions;
still, he lies. But, such being the case, where could you have heard the same
report? It was the inspiration of the moment with him, you understand, so who
could have told <i>you?</i> It is an important question, you see!”
</p>

<p>
“It was Colia told me, and his father told <i>him</i> at about six this
morning. They met at the threshold, when Colia was leaving the room for
something or other.” The prince told Lebedeff all that Colia had made
known to himself, in detail.
</p>

<p>
“There now, that’s what we may call <i>scent!</i>” said
Lebedeff, rubbing his hands and laughing silently. “I thought it must be
so, you see. The general interrupted his innocent slumbers, at six
o’clock, in order to go and wake his beloved son, and warn him of the
dreadful danger of companionship with Ferdishenko. Dear me! what a dreadfully
dangerous man Ferdishenko must be, and what touching paternal solicitude, on
the part of his excellency, ha! ha! ha!”
</p>

<p>
“Listen, Lebedeff,” began the prince, quite overwhelmed;
“<i>do</i> act quietly—don’t make a scandal, Lebedeff, I ask
you—I entreat you! No one must know—<i>no one</i>, mind! In that
case only, I will help you.”
</p>

<p>
“Be assured, most honourable, most worthy of princes—be assured
that the whole matter shall be buried within my heart!” cried Lebedeff,
in a paroxysm of exaltation. “I’d give every drop of my blood...
Illustrious prince, I am a poor wretch in soul and spirit, but ask the veriest
scoundrel whether he would prefer to deal with one like himself, or with a
noble-hearted man like you, and there is no doubt as to his choice! He’ll
answer that he prefers the noble-hearted man—and there you have the
triumph of virtue! <i>Au revoir</i>, honoured prince! You and I
together—softly! softly!”
</p>

<h3>X.</h3>

<p>
The prince understood at last why he shivered with dread every time he thought
of the three letters in his pocket, and why he had put off reading them until
the evening.
</p>

<p>
When he fell into a heavy sleep on the sofa on the verandah, without having had
the courage to open a single one of the three envelopes, he again dreamed a
painful dream, and once more that poor, “sinful” woman appeared to
him. Again she gazed at him with tears sparkling on her long lashes, and
beckoned him after her; and again he awoke, as before, with the picture of her
face haunting him.
</p>

<p>
He longed to get up and go to her at once—but he <i>could not</i>. At
length, almost in despair, he unfolded the letters, and began to read them.
</p>

<p>
These letters, too, were like a dream. We sometimes have strange, impossible
dreams, contrary to all the laws of nature. When we awake we remember them and
wonder at their strangeness. You remember, perhaps, that you were in full
possession of your reason during this succession of fantastic images; even that
you acted with extraordinary logic and cunning while surrounded by murderers
who hid their intentions and made great demonstrations of friendship, while
waiting for an opportunity to cut your throat. You remember how you escaped
them by some ingenious stratagem; then you doubted if they were really
deceived, or whether they were only pretending not to know your hiding-place;
then you thought of another plan and hoodwinked them once again. You remember
all this quite clearly, but how is it that your reason calmly accepted all the
manifest absurdities and impossibilities that crowded into your dream? One of
the murderers suddenly changed into a woman before your very eyes; then the
woman was transformed into a hideous, cunning little dwarf; and you believed
it, and accepted it all almost as a matter of course—while at the same
time your intelligence seemed unusually keen, and accomplished miracles of
cunning, sagacity, and logic! Why is it that when you awake to the world of
realities you nearly always feel, sometimes very vividly, that the vanished
dream has carried with it some enigma which you have failed to solve? You smile
at the extravagance of your dream, and yet you feel that this tissue of
absurdity contained some real idea, something that belongs to your true
life,—something that exists, and has always existed, in your heart. You
search your dream for some prophecy that you were expecting. It has left a deep
impression upon you, joyful or cruel, but what it means, or what has been
predicted to you in it, you can neither understand nor remember.
</p>

<p>
The reading of these letters produced some such effect upon the prince. He
felt, before he even opened the envelopes, that the very fact of their
existence was like a nightmare. How could she ever have made up her mind to
write to her? he asked himself. How could she write about that at all? And how
could such a wild idea have entered her head? And yet, the strangest part of
the matter was, that while he read the letters, he himself almost believed in
the possibility, and even in the justification, of the idea he had thought so
wild. Of course it was a mad dream, a nightmare, and yet there was something
cruelly real about it. For hours he was haunted by what he had read. Several
passages returned again and again to his mind, and as he brooded over them, he
felt inclined to say to himself that he had foreseen and known all that was
written here; it even seemed to him that he had read the whole of this some
time or other, long, long ago; and all that had tormented and grieved him up to
now was to be found in these old, long since read, letters.
</p>

<p>
“When you open this letter” (so the first began), “look first
at the signature. The signature will tell you all, so that I need explain
nothing, nor attempt to justify myself. Were I in any way on a footing with
you, you might be offended at my audacity; but who am I, and who are you? We
are at such extremes, and I am so far removed from you, that I could not offend
you if I wished to do so.”
</p>

<p>
Farther on, in another place, she wrote: “Do not consider my words as the
sickly ecstasies of a diseased mind, but you are, in my
opinion—perfection! I have seen you—I see you every day. I do not
judge you; I have not weighed you in the scales of Reason and found you
Perfection—it is simply an article of faith. But I must confess one sin
against you—I love you. One should not love perfection. One should only
look on it as perfection—yet I am in love with you. Though love
equalizes, do not fear. I have not lowered you to my level, even in my most
secret thoughts. I have written ‘Do not fear,’ as if you could
fear. I would kiss your footprints if I could; but, oh! I am not putting myself
on a level with you!—Look at the signature—quick, look at the
signature!”
</p>

<p>
“However, observe” (she wrote in another of the letters),
“that although I couple you with him, yet I have not once asked you
whether you love him. He fell in love with you, though he saw you but once. He
spoke of you as of ‘the light.’ These are his own words—I
heard him use them. But I understood without his saying it that you were all
that light is to him. I lived near him for a whole month, and I understood then
that you, too, must love him. I think of you and him as one.”
</p>

<p>
“What was the matter yesterday?” (she wrote on another sheet).
“I passed by you, and you seemed to me to <i>blush</i>. Perhaps it was
only my fancy. If I were to bring you to the most loathsome den, and show you
the revelation of undisguised vice—you should not blush. You can never
feel the sense of personal affront. You may hate all who are mean, or base, or
unworthy—but not for yourself—only for those whom they wrong. No
one can wrong <i>you</i>. Do you know, I think you ought to love me—for
you are the same in my eyes as in his—you are as light. An angel cannot
hate, perhaps cannot love, either. I often ask myself—is it possible to
love everybody? Indeed it is not; it is not in nature. Abstract love of
humanity is nearly always love of self. But you are different. You cannot help
loving all, since you can compare with none, and are above all personal offence
or anger. Oh! how bitter it would be to me to know that you felt anger or shame
on my account, for that would be your fall—you would become comparable at
once with such as me.
</p>

<p>
“Yesterday, after seeing you, I went home and thought out a picture.
</p>

<p>
“Artists always draw the Saviour as an actor in one of the Gospel
stories. I should do differently. I should represent Christ alone—the
disciples did leave Him alone occasionally. I should paint one little child
left with Him. This child has been playing about near Him, and had probably
just been telling the Saviour something in its pretty baby prattle. Christ had
listened to it, but was now musing—one hand reposing on the child’s
bright head. His eyes have a far-away expression. Thought, great as the
Universe, is in them—His face is sad. The little one leans its elbow upon
Christ’s knee, and with its cheek resting on its hand, gazes up at Him,
pondering as children sometimes do ponder. The sun is setting. There you have
my picture.
</p>

<p>
“You are innocent—and in your innocence lies all your
perfection—oh, remember that! What is my passion to you?—you are
mine now; I shall be near you all my life—I shall not live long!”
</p>

<p>
At length, in the last letter of all, he found:
</p>

<p>
“For Heaven’s sake, don’t misunderstand me! Do not think that
I humiliate myself by writing thus to you, or that I belong to that class of
people who take a satisfaction in humiliating themselves—from pride. I
have my consolation, though it would be difficult to explain it—but I do
not humiliate myself.
</p>

<p>
“Why do I wish to unite you two? For your sakes or my own? For my own
sake, naturally. All the problems of my life would thus be solved; I have
thought so for a long time. I know that once when your sister Adelaida saw my
portrait she said that such beauty could overthrow the world. But I have
renounced the world. You think it strange that I should say so, for you saw me
decked with lace and diamonds, in the company of drunkards and wastrels. Take
no notice of that; I know that I have almost ceased to exist. God knows what it
is dwelling within me now—it is not myself. I can see it every day in two
dreadful eyes which are always looking at me, even when not present. These eyes
are silent now, they say nothing; but I know their secret. His house is gloomy,
and there is a secret in it. I am convinced that in some box he has a razor
hidden, tied round with silk, just like the one that Moscow murderer had. This
man also lived with his mother, and had a razor hidden away, tied round with
white silk, and with this razor he intended to cut a throat.
</p>

<p>
“All the while I was in their house I felt sure that somewhere beneath
the floor there was hidden away some dreadful corpse, wrapped in oil-cloth,
perhaps buried there by his father, who knows? Just as in the Moscow case. I
could have shown you the very spot!
</p>

<p>
“He is always silent, but I know well that he loves me so much that he
must hate me. My wedding and yours are to be on the same day; so I have
arranged with him. I have no secrets from him. I would kill him from very
fright, but he will kill me first. He has just burst out laughing, and says
that I am raving. He knows I am writing to you.”
</p>

<p>
There was much more of this delirious wandering in the letters—one of
them was very long.
</p>

<p>
At last the prince came out of the dark, gloomy park, in which he had wandered
about for hours just as yesterday. The bright night seemed to him to be lighter
than ever. “It must be quite early,” he thought. (He had forgotten
his watch.) There was a sound of distant music somewhere. “Ah,” he
thought, “the Vauxhall! They won’t be there today, of
course!” At this moment he noticed that he was close to their house; he
had felt that he must gravitate to this spot eventually, and, with a beating
heart, he mounted the verandah steps.
</p>

<p>
No one met him; the verandah was empty, and nearly pitch dark. He opened the
door into the room, but it, too, was dark and empty. He stood in the middle of
the room in perplexity. Suddenly the door opened, and in came Alexandra, candle
in hand. Seeing the prince she stopped before him in surprise, looking at him
questioningly.
</p>

<p>
It was clear that she had been merely passing through the room from door to
door, and had not had the remotest notion that she would meet anyone.
</p>

<p>
“How did you come here?” she asked, at last.
</p>

<p>
“I—I—came in—”
</p>

<p>
“Mamma is not very well, nor is Aglaya. Adelaida has gone to bed, and I
am just going. We were alone the whole evening. Father and Prince S. have gone
to town.”
</p>

<p>
“I have come to you—now—to—”
</p>

<p>
“Do you know what time it is?”
</p>

<p>
“N—no!”
</p>

<p>
“Half-past twelve. We are always in bed by one.”
</p>

<p>
“I—I thought it was half-past nine!”
</p>

<p>
“Never mind!” she laughed, “but why didn’t you come
earlier? Perhaps you were expected!”
</p>

<p>
“I thought” he stammered, making for the door.
</p>

<p>
“<i>Au revoir!</i> I shall amuse them all with this story
tomorrow!”
</p>

<p>
He walked along the road towards his own house. His heart was beating, his
thoughts were confused, everything around seemed to be part of a dream.
</p>

<p>
And suddenly, just as twice already he had awaked from sleep with the same
vision, that very apparition now seemed to rise up before him. The woman
appeared to step out from the park, and stand in the path in front of him, as
though she had been waiting for him there.
</p>

<p>
He shuddered and stopped; she seized his hand and pressed it frenziedly.
</p>

<p>
No, this was no apparition!
</p>

<p>
There she stood at last, face to face with him, for the first time since their
parting.
</p>

<p>
She said something, but he looked silently back at her. His heart ached with
anguish. Oh! never would he banish the recollection of this meeting with her,
and he never remembered it but with the same pain and agony of mind.
</p>

<p>
She went on her knees before him—there in the open road—like a
madwoman. He retreated a step, but she caught his hand and kissed it, and, just
as in his dream, the tears were sparkling on her long, beautiful lashes.
</p>

<p>
“Get up!” he said, in a frightened whisper, raising her. “Get
up at once!”
</p>

<p>
“Are you happy—are you happy?” she asked. “Say this one
word. Are you happy now? Today, this moment? Have you just been with her? What
did she say?”
</p>

<p>
She did not rise from her knees; she would not listen to him; she put her
questions hurriedly, as though she were pursued.
</p>

<p>
“I am going away tomorrow, as you bade me—I won’t
write—so that this is the last time I shall see you, the last time! This
is really the <i>last time!</i>”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, be calm—be calm! Get up!” he entreated, in despair.
</p>

<p>
She gazed thirstily at him and clutched his hands.
</p>

<p>
“Good-bye!” she said at last, and rose and left him, very quickly.
</p>

<p>
The prince noticed that Rogojin had suddenly appeared at her side, and had
taken her arm and was leading her away.
</p>

<p>
“Wait a minute, prince,” shouted the latter, as he went. “I
shall be back in five minutes.”
</p>

<p>
He reappeared in five minutes as he had said. The prince was waiting for him.
</p>

<p>
“I’ve put her in the carriage,” he said; “it has been
waiting round the corner there since ten o’clock. She expected that you
would be with <i>them</i> all the evening. I told her exactly what you wrote
me. She won’t write to the girl any more, she promises; and tomorrow she
will be off, as you wish. She desired to see you for the last time, although
you refused, so we’ve been sitting and waiting on that bench till you
should pass on your way home.”
</p>

<p>
“Did she bring you with her of her own accord?”
</p>

<p>
“Of course she did!” said Rogojin, showing his teeth; “and I
saw for myself what I knew before. You’ve read her letters, I
suppose?”
</p>

<p>
“Did you read them?” asked the prince, struck by the thought.
</p>

<p>
“Of course—she showed them to me herself. You are thinking of the
razor, eh? Ha, ha, ha!”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, she is mad!” cried the prince, wringing his hands.
</p>

<p>
“Who knows? Perhaps she is not so mad after all,” said Rogojin,
softly, as though thinking aloud.
</p>

<p>
The prince made no reply.
</p>

<p>
“Well, good-bye,” said Rogojin. “I’m off tomorrow too,
you know. Remember me kindly! By-the-by,” he added, turning round sharply
again, “did you answer her question just now? Are you happy, or
not?”
</p>

<p>
“No, no, no!” cried the prince, with unspeakable sadness.
</p>

<p>
“Ha, ha! I never supposed you would say ‘yes,’” cried
Rogojin, laughing sardonically.
</p>

<p>
And he disappeared, without looking round again.
</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
