<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			
<h2><a name="part01" id="part01"></a>PART I</h2>

<h3>I.</h3>

<p>
Towards the end of November, during a thaw, at nine o’clock one morning,
a train on the Warsaw and Petersburg railway was approaching the latter city at
full speed. The morning was so damp and misty that it was only with great
difficulty that the day succeeded in breaking; and it was impossible to
distinguish anything more than a few yards away from the carriage windows.
</p>

<p>
Some of the passengers by this particular train were returning from abroad; but
the third-class carriages were the best filled, chiefly with insignificant
persons of various occupations and degrees, picked up at the different stations
nearer town. All of them seemed weary, and most of them had sleepy eyes and a
shivering expression, while their complexions generally appeared to have taken
on the colour of the fog outside.
</p>

<p>
When day dawned, two passengers in one of the third-class carriages found
themselves opposite each other. Both were young fellows, both were rather
poorly dressed, both had remarkable faces, and both were evidently anxious to
start a conversation. If they had but known why, at this particular moment,
they were both remarkable persons, they would undoubtedly have wondered at the
strange chance which had set them down opposite to one another in a third-class
carriage of the Warsaw Railway Company.
</p>

<p>
One of them was a young fellow of about twenty-seven, not tall, with black
curling hair, and small, grey, fiery eyes. His nose was broad and flat, and he
had high cheek bones; his thin lips were constantly compressed into an
impudent, ironical—it might almost be called a malicious—smile; but
his forehead was high and well formed, and atoned for a good deal of the
ugliness of the lower part of his face. A special feature of this physiognomy
was its death-like pallor, which gave to the whole man an indescribably
emaciated appearance in spite of his hard look, and at the same time a sort of
passionate and suffering expression which did not harmonize with his impudent,
sarcastic smile and keen, self-satisfied bearing. He wore a large fur—or
rather astrachan—overcoat, which had kept him warm all night, while his
neighbour had been obliged to bear the full severity of a Russian November
night entirely unprepared. His wide sleeveless mantle with a large cape to
it—the sort of cloak one sees upon travellers during the winter months in
Switzerland or North Italy—was by no means adapted to the long cold
journey through Russia, from Eydkuhnen to St. Petersburg.
</p>

<p>
The wearer of this cloak was a young fellow, also of about twenty-six or
twenty-seven years of age, slightly above the middle height, very fair, with a
thin, pointed and very light coloured beard; his eyes were large and blue, and
had an intent look about them, yet that heavy expression which some people
affirm to be a peculiarity as well as evidence, of an epileptic subject. His
face was decidedly a pleasant one for all that; refined, but quite colourless,
except for the circumstance that at this moment it was blue with cold. He held
a bundle made up of an old faded silk handkerchief that apparently contained
all his travelling wardrobe, and wore thick shoes and gaiters, his whole
appearance being very un-Russian.
</p>

<p>
His black-haired neighbour inspected these peculiarities, having nothing better
to do, and at length remarked, with that rude enjoyment of the discomforts of
others which the common classes so often show:
</p>

<p>
“Cold?”
</p>

<p>
“Very,” said his neighbour, readily, “and this is a thaw,
too. Fancy if it had been a hard frost! I never thought it would be so cold in
the old country. I’ve grown quite out of the way of it.”
</p>

<p>
“What, been abroad, I suppose?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, straight from Switzerland.”
</p>

<p>
“Wheugh! my goodness!” The black-haired young fellow whistled, and
then laughed.
</p>

<p>
The conversation proceeded. The readiness of the fair-haired young man in the
cloak to answer all his opposite neighbour’s questions was surprising. He
seemed to have no suspicion of any impertinence or inappropriateness in the
fact of such questions being put to him. Replying to them, he made known to the
inquirer that he certainly had been long absent from Russia, more than four
years; that he had been sent abroad for his health; that he had suffered from
some strange nervous malady—a kind of epilepsy, with convulsive spasms.
His interlocutor burst out laughing several times at his answers; and more than
ever, when to the question, “whether he had been cured?” the
patient replied:
</p>

<p>
“No, they did not cure me.”
</p>

<p>
“Hey! that’s it! You stumped up your money for nothing, and we
believe in those fellows, here!” remarked the black-haired individual,
sarcastically.
</p>

<p>
“Gospel truth, sir, Gospel truth!” exclaimed another passenger, a
shabbily dressed man of about forty, who looked like a clerk, and possessed a
red nose and a very blotchy face. “Gospel truth! All they do is to get
hold of our good Russian money free, gratis, and for nothing.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, but you’re quite wrong in my particular instance,” said
the Swiss patient, quietly. “Of course I can’t argue the matter,
because I know only my own case; but my doctor gave me money—and he had
very little—to pay my journey back, besides having kept me at his own
expense, while there, for nearly two years.”
</p>

<p>
“Why? Was there no one else to pay for you?” asked the black-haired
one.
</p>

<p>
“No—Mr. Pavlicheff, who had been supporting me there, died a couple
of years ago. I wrote to Mrs. General Epanchin at the time (she is a distant
relative of mine), but she did not answer my letter. And so eventually I came
back.”
</p>

<p>
“And where have you come to?”
</p>

<p>
“That is—where am I going to stay? I—I really don’t
quite know yet, I—”
</p>

<p>
Both the listeners laughed again.
</p>

<p>
“I suppose your whole set-up is in that bundle, then?” asked the
first.
</p>

<p>
“I bet anything it is!” exclaimed the red-nosed passenger, with
extreme satisfaction, “and that he has precious little in the luggage
van!—though of course poverty is no crime—we must remember
that!”
</p>

<p>
It appeared that it was indeed as they had surmised. The young fellow hastened
to admit the fact with wonderful readiness.
</p>

<p>
“Your bundle has some importance, however,” continued the clerk,
when they had laughed their fill (it was observable that the subject of their
mirth joined in the laughter when he saw them laughing); “for though I
dare say it is not stuffed full of friedrichs d’or and louis
d’or—judge from your costume and gaiters—still—if you
can add to your possessions such a valuable property as a relation like Mrs.
General Epanchin, then your bundle becomes a significant object at once. That
is, of course, if you really are a relative of Mrs. Epanchin’s, and have
not made a little error through—well, absence of mind, which is very
common to human beings; or, say—through a too luxuriant fancy?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, you are right again,” said the fair-haired traveller,
“for I really am <i>almost</i> wrong when I say she and I are related.
She is hardly a relation at all; so little, in fact, that I was not in the
least surprised to have no answer to my letter. I expected as much.”
</p>

<p>
“H’m! you spent your postage for nothing, then. H’m! you are
candid, however—and that is commendable. H’m! Mrs.
Epanchin—oh yes! a most eminent person. I know her. As for Mr.
Pavlicheff, who supported you in Switzerland, I know him too—at least, if
it was Nicolai Andreevitch of that name? A fine fellow he was—and had a
property of four thousand souls in his day.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, Nicolai Andreevitch—that was his name,” and the young
fellow looked earnestly and with curiosity at the all-knowing gentleman with
the red nose.
</p>

<p>
This sort of character is met with pretty frequently in a certain class. They
are people who know everyone—that is, they know where a man is employed,
what his salary is, whom he knows, whom he married, what money his wife had,
who are his cousins, and second cousins, etc., etc. These men generally have
about a hundred pounds a year to live on, and they spend their whole time and
talents in the amassing of this style of knowledge, which they reduce—or
raise—to the standard of a science.
</p>

<p>
During the latter part of the conversation the black-haired young man had
become very impatient. He stared out of the window, and fidgeted, and evidently
longed for the end of the journey. He was very absent; he would appear to
listen—and heard nothing; and he would laugh of a sudden, evidently with
no idea of what he was laughing about.
</p>

<p>
“Excuse me,” said the red-nosed man to the young fellow with the
bundle, rather suddenly; “whom have I the honour to be talking to?”
</p>

<p>
“Prince Lef Nicolaievitch Muishkin,” replied the latter, with
perfect readiness.
</p>

<p>
“Prince Muishkin? Lef Nicolaievitch? H’m! I don’t know,
I’m sure! I may say I have never heard of such a person,” said the
clerk, thoughtfully. “At least, the name, I admit, is historical.
Karamsin must mention the family name, of course, in his history—but as
an individual—one never hears of any Prince Muishkin nowadays.”
</p>

<p>
“Of course not,” replied the prince; “there are none, except
myself. I believe I am the last and only one. As to my forefathers, they have
always been a poor lot; my own father was a sublieutenant in the army. I
don’t know how Mrs. Epanchin comes into the Muishkin family, but she is
descended from the Princess Muishkin, and she, too, is the last of her
line.”
</p>

<p>
“And did you learn science and all that, with your professor over
there?” asked the black-haired passenger.
</p>

<p>
“Oh yes—I did learn a little, but—”
</p>

<p>
“I’ve never learned anything whatever,” said the other.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, but I learned very little, you know!” added the prince, as
though excusing himself. “They could not teach me very much on account of
my illness.”
</p>

<p>
“Do you know the Rogojins?” asked his questioner, abruptly.
</p>

<p>
“No, I don’t—not at all! I hardly know anyone in Russia. Why,
is that your name?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I am Rogojin, Parfen Rogojin.”
</p>

<p>
“Parfen Rogojin? dear me—then don’t you belong to those very
Rogojins, perhaps—” began the clerk, with a very perceptible
increase of civility in his tone.
</p>

<p>
“Yes—those very ones,” interrupted Rogojin, impatiently, and
with scant courtesy. I may remark that he had not once taken any notice of the
blotchy-faced passenger, and had hitherto addressed all his remarks direct to
the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Dear me—is it possible?” observed the clerk, while his face
assumed an expression of great deference and servility—if not of absolute
alarm: “what, a son of that very Semen Rogojin—hereditary
honourable citizen—who died a month or so ago and left two million and a
half of roubles?”
</p>

<p>
“And how do <i>you</i> know that he left two million and a half of
roubles?” asked Rogojin, disdainfully, and not deigning so much as to
look at the other. “However, it’s true enough that my father died a
month ago, and that here am I returning from Pskoff, a month after, with hardly
a boot to my foot. They’ve treated me like a dog! I’ve been ill of
fever at Pskoff the whole time, and not a line, nor farthing of money, have I
received from my mother or my confounded brother!”
</p>

<p>
“And now you’ll have a million roubles, at least—goodness
gracious me!” exclaimed the clerk, rubbing his hands.
</p>

<p>
“Five weeks since, I was just like yourself,” continued Rogojin,
addressing the prince, “with nothing but a bundle and the clothes I wore.
I ran away from my father and came to Pskoff to my aunt’s house, where I
caved in at once with fever, and he went and died while I was away. All honour
to my respected father’s memory—but he uncommonly nearly killed me,
all the same. Give you my word, prince, if I hadn’t cut and run then,
when I did, he’d have murdered me like a dog.”
</p>

<p>
“I suppose you angered him somehow?” asked the prince, looking at
the millionaire with considerable curiosity. But though there may have been
something remarkable in the fact that this man was heir to millions of roubles
there was something about him which surprised and interested the prince more
than that. Rogojin, too, seemed to have taken up the conversation with unusual
alacrity it appeared that he was still in a considerable state of excitement,
if not absolutely feverish, and was in real need of someone to talk to for the
mere sake of talking, as safety-valve to his agitation.
</p>

<p>
As for his red-nosed neighbour, the latter—since the information as to
the identity of Rogojin—hung over him, seemed to be living on the honey
of his words and in the breath of his nostrils, catching at every syllable as
though it were a pearl of great price.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, yes; I angered him—I certainly did anger him,” replied
Rogojin. “But what puts me out so is my brother. Of course my mother
couldn’t do anything—she’s too old—and whatever brother
Senka says is law for her! But why couldn’t he let me know? He sent a
telegram, they say. What’s the good of a telegram? It frightened my aunt
so that she sent it back to the office unopened, and there it’s been ever
since! It’s only thanks to Konief that I heard at all; he wrote me all
about it. He says my brother cut off the gold tassels from my father’s
coffin, at night ‘because they’re worth a lot of money!’ says
he. Why, I can get him sent off to Siberia for that alone, if I like;
it’s sacrilege. Here, you—scarecrow!” he added, addressing
the clerk at his side, “is it sacrilege or not, by law?”
</p>

<p>
“Sacrilege, certainly—certainly sacrilege,” said the latter.
</p>

<p>
“And it’s Siberia for sacrilege, isn’t it?”
</p>

<p>
“Undoubtedly so; Siberia, of course!”
</p>

<p>
“They will think that I’m still ill,” continued Rogojin to
the prince, “but I sloped off quietly, seedy as I was, took the train and
came away. Aha, brother Senka, you’ll have to open your gates and let me
in, my boy! I know he told tales about me to my father—I know that well
enough but I certainly did rile my father about Nastasia Philipovna
that’s very sure, and that was my own doing.”
</p>

<p>
“Nastasia Philipovna?” said the clerk, as though trying to think
out something.
</p>

<p>
“Come, you know nothing about <i>her</i>,” said Rogojin,
impatiently.
</p>

<p>
“And supposing I do know something?” observed the other,
triumphantly.
</p>

<p>
“Bosh! there are plenty of Nastasia Philipovnas. And what an impertinent
beast you are!” he added angrily. “I thought some creature like you
would hang on to me as soon as I got hold of my money.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, but I do know, as it happens,” said the clerk in an
aggravating manner. “Lebedeff knows all about her. You are pleased to
reproach me, your excellency, but what if I prove that I am right after all?
Nastasia Philipovna’s family name is Barashkoff—I know, you
see—and she is a very well known lady, indeed, and comes of a good
family, too. She is connected with one Totski, Afanasy Ivanovitch, a man of
considerable property, a director of companies, and so on, and a great friend
of General Epanchin, who is interested in the same matters as he is.”
</p>

<p>
“My eyes!” said Rogojin, really surprised at last. “The devil
take the fellow, how does he know that?”
</p>

<p>
“Why, he knows everything—Lebedeff knows everything! I was a month
or two with Lihachof after his father died, your excellency, and while he was
knocking about—he’s in the debtor’s prison now—I was
with him, and he couldn’t do a thing without Lebedeff; and I got to know
Nastasia Philipovna and several people at that time.”
</p>

<p>
“Nastasia Philipovna? Why, you don’t mean to say that she and
Lihachof—” cried Rogojin, turning quite pale.
</p>

<p>
“No, no, no, no, no! Nothing of the sort, I assure you!” said
Lebedeff, hastily. “Oh dear no, not for the world! Totski’s the
only man with any chance there. Oh, no! He takes her to his box at the opera at
the French theatre of an evening, and the officers and people all look at her
and say, ‘By Jove, there’s the famous Nastasia Philipovna!’
but no one ever gets any further than that, for there is nothing more to
say.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, it’s quite true,” said Rogojin, frowning gloomily;
“so Zaleshoff told me. I was walking about the Nefsky one fine day,
prince, in my father’s old coat, when she suddenly came out of a shop and
stepped into her carriage. I swear I was all of a blaze at once. Then I met
Zaleshoff—looking like a hair-dresser’s assistant, got up as fine
as I don’t know who, while I looked like a tinker. ‘Don’t
flatter yourself, my boy,’ said he; ‘she’s not for such as
you; she’s a princess, she is, and her name is Nastasia Philipovna
Barashkoff, and she lives with Totski, who wishes to get rid of her because
he’s growing rather old—fifty-five or so—and wants to marry a
certain beauty, the loveliest woman in all Petersburg.’ And then he told
me that I could see Nastasia Philipovna at the opera-house that evening, if I
liked, and described which was her box. Well, I’d like to see my father
allowing any of us to go to the theatre; he’d sooner have killed us, any
day. However, I went for an hour or so and saw Nastasia Philipovna, and I never
slept a wink all night after. Next morning my father happened to give me two
government loan bonds to sell, worth nearly five thousand roubles each.
‘Sell them,’ said he, ‘and then take seven thousand five
hundred roubles to the office, give them to the cashier, and bring me back the
rest of the ten thousand, without looking in anywhere on the way; look sharp, I
shall be waiting for you.’ Well, I sold the bonds, but I didn’t
take the seven thousand roubles to the office; I went straight to the English
shop and chose a pair of earrings, with a diamond the size of a nut in each.
They cost four hundred roubles more than I had, so I gave my name, and they
trusted me. With the earrings I went at once to Zaleshoff’s. ‘Come
on!’ I said, ‘come on to Nastasia Philipovna’s,’ and
off we went without more ado. I tell you I hadn’t a notion of what was
about me or before me or below my feet all the way; I saw nothing whatever. We
went straight into her drawing-room, and then she came out to us.
</p>

<p>
“I didn’t say right out who I was, but Zaleshoff said: ‘From
Parfen Rogojin, in memory of his first meeting with you yesterday; be so kind
as to accept these!’
</p>

<p>
“She opened the parcel, looked at the earrings, and laughed.
</p>

<p>
“‘Thank your friend Mr. Rogojin for his kind attention,’ says
she, and bowed and went off. Why didn’t I die there on the spot? The
worst of it all was, though, that the beast Zaleshoff got all the credit of it!
I was short and abominably dressed, and stood and stared in her face and never
said a word, because I was shy, like an ass! And there was he all in the
fashion, pomaded and dressed out, with a smart tie on, bowing and scraping; and
I bet anything she took him for me all the while!
</p>

<p>
“‘Look here now,’ I said, when we came out, ‘none of
your interference here after this—do you understand?’ He laughed:
‘And how are you going to settle up with your father?’ says he. I
thought I might as well jump into the Neva at once without going home first;
but it struck me that I wouldn’t, after all, and I went home feeling like
one of the damned.”
</p>

<p>
“My goodness!” shivered the clerk. “And his father,” he
added, for the prince’s instruction, “and his father would have
given a man a ticket to the other world for ten roubles any day—not to
speak of ten thousand!”
</p>

<p>
The prince observed Rogojin with great curiosity; he seemed paler than ever at
this moment.
</p>

<p>
“What do you know about it?” cried the latter. “Well, my
father learned the whole story at once, and Zaleshoff blabbed it all over the
town besides. So he took me upstairs and locked me up, and swore at me for an
hour. ‘This is only a foretaste,’ says he; ‘wait a bit till
night comes, and I’ll come back and talk to you again.’
</p>

<p>
“Well, what do you think? The old fellow went straight off to Nastasia
Philipovna, touched the floor with his forehead, and began blubbering and
beseeching her on his knees to give him back the diamonds. So after awhile she
brought the box and flew out at him. ‘There,’ she says, ‘take
your earrings, you wretched old miser; although they are ten times dearer than
their value to me now that I know what it must have cost Parfen to get them!
Give Parfen my compliments,’ she says, ‘and thank him very
much!’ Well, I meanwhile had borrowed twenty-five roubles from a friend,
and off I went to Pskoff to my aunt’s. The old woman there lectured me so
that I left the house and went on a drinking tour round the public-houses of
the place. I was in a high fever when I got to Pskoff, and by nightfall I was
lying delirious in the streets somewhere or other!”
</p>

<p>
“Oho! we’ll make Nastasia Philipovna sing another song now!”
giggled Lebedeff, rubbing his hands with glee. “Hey, my boy, we’ll
get her some proper earrings now! We’ll get her such earrings
that—”
</p>

<p>
“Look here,” cried Rogojin, seizing him fiercely by the arm,
“look here, if you so much as name Nastasia Philipovna again, I’ll
tan your hide as sure as you sit there!”
</p>

<p>
“Aha! do—by all means! if you tan my hide you won’t turn me
away from your society. You’ll bind me to you, with your lash, for ever.
Ha, ha! here we are at the station, though.”
</p>

<p>
Sure enough, the train was just steaming in as he spoke.
</p>

<p>
Though Rogojin had declared that he left Pskoff secretly, a large collection of
friends had assembled to greet him, and did so with profuse waving of hats and
shouting.
</p>

<p>
“Why, there’s Zaleshoff here, too!” he muttered, gazing at
the scene with a sort of triumphant but unpleasant smile. Then he suddenly
turned to the prince: “Prince, I don’t know why I have taken a
fancy to you; perhaps because I met you just when I did. But no, it can’t
be that, for I met this fellow” (nodding at Lebedeff) “too, and I
have not taken a fancy to him by any means. Come to see me, prince; we’ll
take off those gaiters of yours and dress you up in a smart fur coat, the best
we can buy. You shall have a dress coat, best quality, white waistcoat,
anything you like, and your pocket shall be full of money. Come, and you shall
go with me to Nastasia Philipovna’s. Now then will you come or no?”
</p>

<p>
“Accept, accept, Prince Lef Nicolaievitch” said Lebedef solemnly;
“don’t let it slip! Accept, quick!”
</p>

<p>
Prince Muishkin rose and stretched out his hand courteously, while he replied
with some cordiality:
</p>

<p>
“I will come with the greatest pleasure, and thank you very much for
taking a fancy to me. I dare say I may even come today if I have time, for I
tell you frankly that I like you very much too. I liked you especially when you
told us about the diamond earrings; but I liked you before that as well, though
you have such a dark-clouded sort of face. Thanks very much for the offer of
clothes and a fur coat; I certainly shall require both clothes and coat very
soon. As for money, I have hardly a copeck about me at this moment.”
</p>

<p>
“You shall have lots of money; by the evening I shall have plenty; so
come along!”
</p>

<p>
“That’s true enough, he’ll have lots before evening!”
put in Lebedeff.
</p>

<p>
“But, look here, are you a great hand with the ladies? Let’s know
that first?” asked Rogojin.
</p>

<p>
“Oh no, oh no!” said the prince; “I couldn’t, you
know—my illness—I hardly ever saw a soul.”
</p>

<p>
“H’m! well—here, you fellow—you can come along with me
now if you like!” cried Rogojin to Lebedeff, and so they all left the
carriage.
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff had his desire. He went off with the noisy group of Rogojin’s
friends towards the Voznesensky, while the prince’s route lay towards the
Litaynaya. It was damp and wet. The prince asked his way of passers-by, and
finding that he was a couple of miles or so from his destination, he determined
to take a droshky.
</p>

<h3>II.</h3>

<p>
General Epanchin lived in his own house near the Litaynaya. Besides this large
residence—five-sixths of which was let in flats and lodgings—the
general was owner of another enormous house in the Sadovaya bringing in even
more rent than the first. Besides these houses he had a delightful little
estate just out of town, and some sort of factory in another part of the city.
General Epanchin, as everyone knew, had a good deal to do with certain
government monopolies; he was also a voice, and an important one, in many rich
public companies of various descriptions; in fact, he enjoyed the reputation of
being a well-to-do man of busy habits, many ties, and affluent means. He had
made himself indispensable in several quarters, amongst others in his
department of the government; and yet it was a known fact that Fedor Ivanovitch
Epanchin was a man of no education whatever, and had absolutely risen from the
ranks.
</p>

<p>
This last fact could, of course, reflect nothing but credit upon the general;
and yet, though unquestionably a sagacious man, he had his own little
weaknesses—very excusable ones,—one of which was a dislike to any
allusion to the above circumstance. He was undoubtedly clever. For instance, he
made a point of never asserting himself when he would gain more by keeping in
the background; and in consequence many exalted personages valued him
principally for his humility and simplicity, and because “he knew his
place.” And yet if these good people could only have had a peep into the
mind of this excellent fellow who “knew his place” so well! The
fact is that, in spite of his knowledge of the world and his really remarkable
abilities, he always liked to appear to be carrying out other people’s
ideas rather than his own. And also, his luck seldom failed him, even at cards,
for which he had a passion that he did not attempt to conceal. He played for
high stakes, and moved, altogether, in very varied society.
</p>

<p>
As to age, General Epanchin was in the very prime of life; that is, about
fifty-five years of age,—the flowering time of existence, when real
enjoyment of life begins. His healthy appearance, good colour, sound, though
discoloured teeth, sturdy figure, preoccupied air during business hours, and
jolly good humour during his game at cards in the evening, all bore witness to
his success in life, and combined to make existence a bed of roses to his
excellency. The general was lord of a flourishing family, consisting of his
wife and three grown-up daughters. He had married young, while still a
lieutenant, his wife being a girl of about his own age, who possessed neither
beauty nor education, and who brought him no more than fifty souls of landed
property, which little estate served, however, as a nest-egg for far more
important accumulations. The general never regretted his early marriage, or
regarded it as a foolish youthful escapade; and he so respected and feared his
wife that he was very near loving her. Mrs. Epanchin came of the princely stock
of Muishkin, which if not a brilliant, was, at all events, a decidedly ancient
family; and she was extremely proud of her descent.
</p>

<p>
With a few exceptions, the worthy couple had lived through their long union
very happily. While still young the wife had been able to make important
friends among the aristocracy, partly by virtue of her family descent, and
partly by her own exertions; while, in after life, thanks to their wealth and
to the position of her husband in the service, she took her place among the
higher circles as by right.
</p>

<p>
During these last few years all three of the general’s
daughters—Alexandra, Adelaida, and Aglaya—had grown up and matured.
Of course they were only Epanchins, but their mother’s family was noble;
they might expect considerable fortunes; their father had hopes of attaining to
very high rank indeed in his country’s service—all of which was
satisfactory. All three of the girls were decidedly pretty, even the eldest,
Alexandra, who was just twenty-five years old. The middle daughter was now
twenty-three, while the youngest, Aglaya, was twenty. This youngest girl was
absolutely a beauty, and had begun of late to attract considerable attention in
society. But this was not all, for every one of the three was clever, well
educated, and accomplished.
</p>

<p>
It was a matter of general knowledge that the three girls were very fond of one
another, and supported each other in every way; it was even said that the two
elder ones had made certain sacrifices for the sake of the idol of the
household, Aglaya. In society they not only disliked asserting themselves, but
were actually retiring. Certainly no one could blame them for being too
arrogant or haughty, and yet everybody was well aware that they were proud and
quite understood their own value. The eldest was musical, while the second was
a clever artist, which fact she had concealed until lately. In a word, the
world spoke well of the girls; but they were not without their enemies, and
occasionally people talked with horror of the number of books they had read.
</p>

<p>
They were in no hurry to marry. They liked good society, but were not too keen
about it. All this was the more remarkable, because everyone was well aware of
the hopes and aims of their parents.
</p>

<p>
It was about eleven o’clock in the forenoon when the prince rang the bell
at General Epanchin’s door. The general lived on the first floor or flat
of the house, as modest a lodging as his position permitted. A liveried servant
opened the door, and the prince was obliged to enter into long explanations
with this gentleman, who, from the first glance, looked at him and his bundle
with grave suspicion. At last, however, on the repeated positive assurance that
he really was Prince Muishkin, and must absolutely see the general on business,
the bewildered domestic showed him into a little ante-chamber leading to a
waiting-room that adjoined the general’s study, there handing him over to
another servant, whose duty it was to be in this ante-chamber all the morning,
and announce visitors to the general. This second individual wore a dress coat,
and was some forty years of age; he was the general’s special study
servant, and well aware of his own importance.
</p>

<p>
“Wait in the next room, please; and leave your bundle here,” said
the door-keeper, as he sat down comfortably in his own easy-chair in the
ante-chamber. He looked at the prince in severe surprise as the latter settled
himself in another chair alongside, with his bundle on his knees.
</p>

<p>
“If you don’t mind, I would rather sit here with you,” said
the prince; “I should prefer it to sitting in there.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, but you can’t stay here. You are a visitor—a guest, so
to speak. Is it the general himself you wish to see?”
</p>

<p>
The man evidently could not take in the idea of such a shabby-looking visitor,
and had decided to ask once more.
</p>

<p>
“Yes—I have business—” began the prince.
</p>

<p>
“I do not ask you what your business may be, all I have to do is to
announce you; and unless the secretary comes in here I cannot do that.”
</p>

<p>
The man’s suspicions seemed to increase more and more. The prince was too
unlike the usual run of daily visitors; and although the general certainly did
receive, on business, all sorts and conditions of men, yet in spite of this
fact the servant felt great doubts on the subject of this particular visitor.
The presence of the secretary as an intermediary was, he judged, essential in
this case.
</p>

<p>
“Surely you—are from abroad?” he inquired at last, in a
confused sort of way. He had begun his sentence intending to say, “Surely
you are not Prince Muishkin, are you?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, straight from the train! Did not you intend to say, ‘Surely
you are not Prince Muishkin?’ just now, but refrained out of
politeness?”
</p>

<p>
“H’m!” grunted the astonished servant.
</p>

<p>
“I assure you I am not deceiving you; you shall not have to answer for
me. As to my being dressed like this, and carrying a bundle, there’s
nothing surprising in that—the fact is, my circumstances are not
particularly rosy at this moment.”
</p>

<p>
“H’m!—no, I’m not afraid of that, you see; I have to
announce you, that’s all. The secretary will be out directly—that
is, unless you—yes, that’s the rub—unless you—come, you
must allow me to ask you—you’ve not come to beg, have you?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh dear no, you can be perfectly easy on that score. I have quite
another matter on hand.”
</p>

<p>
“You must excuse my asking, you know. Your appearance led me to
think—but just wait for the secretary; the general is busy now, but the
secretary is sure to come out.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh—well, look here, if I have some time to wait, would you mind
telling me, is there any place about where I could have a smoke? I have my pipe
and tobacco with me.”
</p>

<p>
“<i>Smoke?</i>” said the man, in shocked but disdainful surprise,
blinking his eyes at the prince as though he could not believe his senses.
“No, sir, you cannot smoke here, and I wonder you are not ashamed of the
very suggestion. Ha, ha! a cool idea that, I declare!”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, I didn’t mean in this room! I know I can’t smoke here,
of course. I’d adjourn to some other room, wherever you like to show me
to. You see, I’m used to smoking a good deal, and now I haven’t had
a puff for three hours; however, just as you like.”
</p>

<p>
“Now how on earth am I to announce a man like that?” muttered the
servant. “In the first place, you’ve no right in here at all; you
ought to be in the waiting-room, because you’re a sort of visitor—a
guest, in fact—and I shall catch it for this. Look here, do you intend to
take up you abode with us?” he added, glancing once more at the
prince’s bundle, which evidently gave him no peace.
</p>

<p>
“No, I don’t think so. I don’t think I should stay even if
they were to invite me. I’ve simply come to make their acquaintance, and
nothing more.”
</p>

<p>
“Make their acquaintance?” asked the man, in amazement, and with
redoubled suspicion. “Then why did you say you had business with the
general?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh well, very little business. There is one little matter—some
advice I am going to ask him for; but my principal object is simply to
introduce myself, because I am Prince Muishkin, and Madame Epanchin is the last
of her branch of the house, and besides herself and me there are no other
Muishkins left.”
</p>

<p>
“What—you’re a relation then, are you?” asked the
servant, so bewildered that he began to feel quite alarmed.
</p>

<p>
“Well, hardly so. If you stretch a point, we are relations, of course,
but so distant that one cannot really take cognizance of it. I once wrote to
your mistress from abroad, but she did not reply. However, I have thought it
right to make acquaintance with her on my arrival. I am telling you all this in
order to ease your mind, for I see you are still far from comfortable on my
account. All you have to do is to announce me as Prince Muishkin, and the
object of my visit will be plain enough. If I am received—very good; if
not, well, very good again. But they are sure to receive me, I should think;
Madame Epanchin will naturally be curious to see the only remaining
representative of her family. She values her Muishkin descent very highly, if I
am rightly informed.”
</p>

<p>
The prince’s conversation was artless and confiding to a degree, and the
servant could not help feeling that as from visitor to common serving-man this
state of things was highly improper. His conclusion was that one of two things
must be the explanation—either that this was a begging impostor, or that
the prince, if prince he were, was simply a fool, without the slightest
ambition; for a sensible prince with any ambition would certainly not wait
about in ante-rooms with servants, and talk of his own private affairs like
this. In either case, how was he to announce this singular visitor?
</p>

<p>
“I really think I must request you to step into the next room!” he
said, with all the insistence he could muster.
</p>

<p>
“Why? If I had been sitting there now, I should not have had the
opportunity of making these personal explanations. I see you are still uneasy
about me and keep eyeing my cloak and bundle. Don’t you think you might
go in yourself now, without waiting for the secretary to come out?”
</p>

<p>
“No, no! I can’t announce a visitor like yourself without the
secretary. Besides the general said he was not to be disturbed—he is with
the Colonel C—. Gavrila Ardalionovitch goes in without announcing.”
</p>

<p>
“Who may that be? a clerk?”
</p>

<p>
“What? Gavrila Ardalionovitch? Oh no; he belongs to one of the companies.
Look here, at all events put your bundle down, here.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I will if I may; and—can I take off my cloak”
</p>

<p>
“Of course; you can’t go in <i>there</i> with it on, anyhow.”
</p>

<p>
The prince rose and took off his mantle, revealing a neat enough morning
costume—a little worn, but well made. He wore a steel watch chain and
from this chain there hung a silver Geneva watch. Fool the prince might be,
still, the general’s servant felt that it was not correct for him to
continue to converse thus with a visitor, in spite of the fact that the prince
pleased him somehow.
</p>

<p>
“And what time of day does the lady receive?” the latter asked,
reseating himself in his old place.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, that’s not in <i>my</i> province! I believe she receives at
any time; it depends upon the visitors. The dressmaker goes in at eleven.
Gavrila Ardalionovitch is allowed much earlier than other people, too; he is
even admitted to early lunch now and then.”
</p>

<p>
“It is much warmer in the rooms here than it is abroad at this
season,” observed the prince; “but it is much warmer there out of
doors. As for the houses—a Russian can’t live in them in the winter
until he gets accustomed to them.”
</p>

<p>
“Don’t they heat them at all?”
</p>

<p>
“Well, they do heat them a little; but the houses and stoves are so
different to ours.”
</p>

<p>
“H’m! were you long away?”
</p>

<p>
“Four years! and I was in the same place nearly all the time,—in
one village.”
</p>

<p>
“You must have forgotten Russia, hadn’t you?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, indeed I had—a good deal; and, would you believe it, I often
wonder at myself for not having forgotten how to speak Russian? Even now, as I
talk to you, I keep saying to myself ‘how well I am speaking it.’
Perhaps that is partly why I am so talkative this morning. I assure you, ever
since yesterday evening I have had the strongest desire to go on and on talking
Russian.”
</p>

<p>
“H’m! yes; did you live in Petersburg in former years?”
</p>

<p>
This good flunkey, in spite of his conscientious scruples, really could not
resist continuing such a very genteel and agreeable conversation.
</p>

<p>
“In Petersburg? Oh no! hardly at all, and now they say so much is changed
in the place that even those who did know it well are obliged to relearn what
they knew. They talk a good deal about the new law courts, and changes there,
don’t they?”
</p>

<p>
“H’m! yes, that’s true enough. Well now, how is the law over
there, do they administer it more justly than here?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, I don’t know about that! I’ve heard much that is good
about our legal administration, too. There is no capital punishment here for
one thing.”
</p>

<p>
“Is there over there?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes—I saw an execution in France—at Lyons. Schneider took me
over with him to see it.”
</p>

<p>
“What, did they hang the fellow?”
</p>

<p>
“No, they cut off people’s heads in France.”
</p>

<p>
“What did the fellow do?—yell?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh no—it’s the work of an instant. They put a man inside a
frame and a sort of broad knife falls by machinery—they call the thing a
guillotine—it falls with fearful force and weight—the head springs
off so quickly that you can’t wink your eye in between. But all the
preparations are so dreadful. When they announce the sentence, you know, and
prepare the criminal and tie his hands, and cart him off to the
scaffold—that’s the fearful part of the business. The people all
crowd round—even women—though they don’t at all approve of
women looking on.”
</p>

<p>
“No, it’s not a thing for women.”
</p>

<p>
“Of course not—of course not!—bah! The criminal was a fine
intelligent fearless man; Le Gros was his name; and I may tell
you—believe it or not, as you like—that when that man stepped upon
the scaffold he <i>cried</i>, he did indeed,—he was as white as a bit of
paper. Isn’t it a dreadful idea that he should have cried—cried!
Whoever heard of a grown man crying from fear—not a child, but a man who
never had cried before—a grown man of forty-five years. Imagine what must
have been going on in that man’s mind at such a moment; what dreadful
convulsions his whole spirit must have endured; it is an outrage on the soul
that’s what it is. Because it is said ‘thou shalt not kill,’
is he to be killed because he murdered some one else? No, it is not right,
it’s an impossible theory. I assure you, I saw the sight a month ago and
it’s dancing before my eyes to this moment. I dream of it, often.”
</p>

<p>
The prince had grown animated as he spoke, and a tinge of colour suffused his
pale face, though his way of talking was as quiet as ever. The servant followed
his words with sympathetic interest. Clearly he was not at all anxious to bring
the conversation to an end. Who knows? Perhaps he too was a man of imagination
and with some capacity for thought.
</p>

<p>
“Well, at all events it is a good thing that there’s no pain when
the poor fellow’s head flies off,” he remarked.
</p>

<p>
“Do you know, though,” cried the prince warmly, “you made
that remark now, and everyone says the same thing, and the machine is designed
with the purpose of avoiding pain, this guillotine I mean; but a thought came
into my head then: what if it be a bad plan after all? You may laugh at my
idea, perhaps—but I could not help its occurring to me all the same. Now
with the rack and tortures and so on—you suffer terrible pain of course;
but then your torture is bodily pain only (although no doubt you have plenty of
that) until you die. But <i>here</i> I should imagine the most terrible part of
the whole punishment is, not the bodily pain at all—but the certain
knowledge that in an hour,—then in ten minutes, then in half a minute,
then now—this very <i>instant</i>—your soul must quit your body and
that you will no longer be a man—and that this is certain,
<i>certain!</i> That’s the point—the certainty of it. Just that
instant when you place your head on the block and hear the iron grate over your
head—then—that quarter of a second is the most awful of all.
</p>

<p>
“This is not my own fantastical opinion—many people have thought
the same; but I feel it so deeply that I’ll tell you what I think. I
believe that to execute a man for murder is to punish him immeasurably more
dreadfully than is equivalent to his crime. A murder by sentence is far more
dreadful than a murder committed by a criminal. The man who is attacked by
robbers at night, in a dark wood, or anywhere, undoubtedly hopes and hopes that
he may yet escape until the very moment of his death. There are plenty of
instances of a man running away, or imploring for mercy—at all events
hoping on in some degree—even after his throat was cut. But in the case
of an execution, that last hope—having which it is so immeasurably less
dreadful to die,—is taken away from the wretch and <i>certainty</i>
substituted in its place! There is his sentence, and with it that terrible
certainty that he cannot possibly escape death—which, I consider, must be
the most dreadful anguish in the world. You may place a soldier before a
cannon’s mouth in battle, and fire upon him—and he will still hope.
But read to that same soldier his death-sentence, and he will either go mad or
burst into tears. Who dares to say that any man can suffer this without going
mad? No, no! it is an abuse, a shame, it is unnecessary—why should such a
thing exist? Doubtless there may be men who have been sentenced, who have
suffered this mental anguish for a while and then have been reprieved; perhaps
such men may have been able to relate their feelings afterwards. Our Lord
Christ spoke of this anguish and dread. No! no! no! No man should be treated
so, no man, no man!”
</p>

<p>
The servant, though of course he could not have expressed all this as the
prince did, still clearly entered into it and was greatly conciliated, as was
evident from the increased amiability of his expression. “If you are
really very anxious for a smoke,” he remarked, “I think it might
possibly be managed, if you are very quick about it. You see they might come
out and inquire for you, and you wouldn’t be on the spot. You see that
door there? Go in there and you’ll find a little room on the right; you
can smoke there, only open the window, because I ought not to allow it really,
and—.” But there was no time, after all.
</p>

<p>
A young fellow entered the ante-room at this moment, with a bundle of papers in
his hand. The footman hastened to help him take off his overcoat. The new
arrival glanced at the prince out of the corners of his eyes.
</p>

<p>
“This gentleman declares, Gavrila Ardalionovitch,” began the man,
confidentially and almost familiarly, “that he is Prince Muishkin and a
relative of Madame Epanchin’s. He has just arrived from abroad, with
nothing but a bundle by way of luggage—.”
</p>

<p>
The prince did not hear the rest, because at this point the servant continued
his communication in a whisper.
</p>

<p>
Gavrila Ardalionovitch listened attentively, and gazed at the prince with great
curiosity. At last he motioned the man aside and stepped hurriedly towards the
prince.
</p>

<p>
“Are you Prince Muishkin?” he asked, with the greatest courtesy and
amiability.
</p>

<p>
He was a remarkably handsome young fellow of some twenty-eight summers, fair
and of middle height; he wore a small beard, and his face was most intelligent.
Yet his smile, in spite of its sweetness, was a little thin, if I may so call
it, and showed his teeth too evenly; his gaze though decidedly good-humoured
and ingenuous, was a trifle too inquisitive and intent to be altogether
agreeable.
</p>

<p>
“Probably when he is alone he looks quite different, and hardly smiles at
all!” thought the prince.
</p>

<p>
He explained about himself in a few words, very much the same as he had told
the footman and Rogojin beforehand.
</p>

<p>
Gavrila Ardalionovitch meanwhile seemed to be trying to recall something.
</p>

<p>
“Was it not you, then, who sent a letter a year or less ago—from
Switzerland, I think it was—to Elizabetha Prokofievna (Mrs.
Epanchin)?”
</p>

<p>
“It was.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, then, of course they will remember who you are. You wish to see the
general? I’ll tell him at once—he will be free in a minute; but
you—you had better wait in the ante-chamber,—hadn’t you? Why
is he here?” he added, severely, to the man.
</p>

<p>
“I tell you, sir, he wished it himself!”
</p>

<p>
At this moment the study door opened, and a military man, with a portfolio
under his arm, came out talking loudly, and after bidding good-bye to someone
inside, took his departure.
</p>

<p>
“You there, Gania?” cried a voice from the study, “come in
here, will you?”
</p>

<p>
Gavrila Ardalionovitch nodded to the prince and entered the room hastily.
</p>

<p>
A couple of minutes later the door opened again and the affable voice of Gania
cried:
</p>

<p>
“Come in please, prince!”
</p>

<h3>III.</h3>

<p>
General Ivan Fedorovitch Epanchin was standing in the middle of the room, and
gazed with great curiosity at the prince as he entered. He even advanced a
couple of steps to meet him.
</p>

<p>
The prince came forward and introduced himself.
</p>

<p>
“Quite so,” replied the general, “and what can I do for
you?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, I have no special business; my principal object was to make your
acquaintance. I should not like to disturb you. I do not know your times and
arrangements here, you see, but I have only just arrived. I came straight from
the station. I am come direct from Switzerland.”
</p>

<p>
The general very nearly smiled, but thought better of it and kept his smile
back. Then he reflected, blinked his eyes, stared at his guest once more from
head to foot; then abruptly motioned him to a chair, sat down himself, and
waited with some impatience for the prince to speak.
</p>

<p>
Gania stood at his table in the far corner of the room, turning over papers.
</p>

<p>
“I have not much time for making acquaintances, as a rule,” said
the general, “but as, of course, you have your object in coming,
I—”
</p>

<p>
“I felt sure you would think I had some object in view when I resolved to
pay you this visit,” the prince interrupted; “but I give you my
word, beyond the pleasure of making your acquaintance I had no personal object
whatever.”
</p>

<p>
“The pleasure is, of course, mutual; but life is not all pleasure, as you
are aware. There is such a thing as business, and I really do not see what
possible reason there can be, or what we have in common to—”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, there is no reason, of course, and I suppose there is nothing in
common between us, or very little; for if I am Prince Muishkin, and your wife
happens to be a member of my house, that can hardly be called a
‘reason.’ I quite understand that. And yet that was my whole motive
for coming. You see I have not been in Russia for four years, and knew very
little about anything when I left. I had been very ill for a long time, and I
feel now the need of a few good friends. In fact, I have a certain question
upon which I much need advice, and do not know whom to go to for it. I thought
of your family when I was passing through Berlin. ‘They are almost
relations,’ I said to myself, ‘so I’ll begin with them;
perhaps we may get on with each other, I with them and they with me, if they
are kind people;’ and I have heard that you are very kind people!”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, thank you, thank you, I’m sure,” replied the general,
considerably taken aback. “May I ask where you have taken up your
quarters?”
</p>

<p>
“Nowhere, as yet.”
</p>

<p>
“What, straight from the station to my house? And how about your
luggage?”
</p>

<p>
“I only had a small bundle, containing linen, with me, nothing more. I
can carry it in my hand, easily. There will be plenty of time to take a room in
some hotel by the evening.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, then you <i>do</i> intend to take a room?”
</p>

<p>
“Of course.”
</p>

<p>
“To judge from your words, you came straight to my house with the
intention of staying there.”
</p>

<p>
“That could only have been on your invitation. I confess, however, that I
should not have stayed here even if you had invited me, not for any particular
reason, but because it is—well, contrary to my practice and nature,
somehow.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, indeed! Then it is perhaps as well that I neither <i>did</i> invite
you, nor <i>do</i> invite you now. Excuse me, prince, but we had better make
this matter clear, once for all. We have just agreed that with regard to our
relationship there is not much to be said, though, of course, it would have
been very delightful to us to feel that such relationship did actually exist;
therefore, perhaps—”
</p>

<p>
“Therefore, perhaps I had better get up and go away?” said the
prince, laughing merrily as he rose from his place; just as merrily as though
the circumstances were by no means strained or difficult. “And I give you
my word, general, that though I know nothing whatever of manners and customs of
society, and how people live and all that, yet I felt quite sure that this
visit of mine would end exactly as it has ended now. Oh, well, I suppose
it’s all right; especially as my letter was not answered. Well, good-bye,
and forgive me for having disturbed you!”
</p>

<p>
The prince’s expression was so good-natured at this moment, and so
entirely free from even a suspicion of unpleasant feeling was the smile with
which he looked at the general as he spoke, that the latter suddenly paused,
and appeared to gaze at his guest from quite a new point of view, all in an
instant.
</p>

<p>
“Do you know, prince,” he said, in quite a different tone, “I
do not know you at all, yet, and after all, Elizabetha Prokofievna would very
likely be pleased to have a peep at a man of her own name. Wait a little, if
you don’t mind, and if you have time to spare?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, I assure you I’ve lots of time, my time is entirely my
own!” And the prince immediately replaced his soft, round hat on the
table. “I confess, I thought Elizabetha Prokofievna would very likely
remember that I had written her a letter. Just now your servant—outside
there—was dreadfully suspicious that I had come to beg of you. I noticed
that! Probably he has very strict instructions on that score; but I assure you
I did not come to beg. I came to make some friends. But I am rather bothered at
having disturbed you; that’s all I care about.—”
</p>

<p>
“Look here, prince,” said the general, with a cordial smile,
“if you really are the sort of man you appear to be, it may be a source
of great pleasure to us to make your better acquaintance; but, you see, I am a
very busy man, and have to be perpetually sitting here and signing papers, or
off to see his excellency, or to my department, or somewhere; so that though I
should be glad to see more of people, nice people—you see,
I—however, I am sure you are so well brought up that you will see at
once, and—but how old are you, prince?”
</p>

<p>
“Twenty-six.”
</p>

<p>
“No? I thought you very much younger.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, they say I have a ‘young’ face. As to disturbing you I
shall soon learn to avoid doing that, for I hate disturbing people. Besides,
you and I are so differently constituted, I should think, that there must be
very little in common between us. Not that I will ever believe there is
<i>nothing</i> in common between any two people, as some declare is the case. I
am sure people make a great mistake in sorting each other into groups, by
appearances; but I am boring you, I see, you—”
</p>

<p>
“Just two words: have you any means at all? Or perhaps you may be
intending to undertake some sort of employment? Excuse my questioning you,
but—”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, my dear sir, I esteem and understand your kindness in putting the
question. No; at present I have no means whatever, and no employment either,
but I hope to find some. I was living on other people abroad. Schneider, the
professor who treated me and taught me, too, in Switzerland, gave me just
enough money for my journey, so that now I have but a few copecks left. There
certainly is one question upon which I am anxious to have advice,
but—”
</p>

<p>
“Tell me, how do you intend to live now, and what are your plans?”
interrupted the general.
</p>

<p>
“I wish to work, somehow or other.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh yes, but then, you see, you are a philosopher. Have you any talents,
or ability in any direction—that is, any that would bring in money and
bread? Excuse me again—”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, don’t apologize. No, I don’t think I have either talents
or special abilities of any kind; on the contrary. I have always been an
invalid and unable to learn much. As for bread, I should think—”
</p>

<p>
The general interrupted once more with questions; while the prince again
replied with the narrative we have heard before. It appeared that the general
had known Pavlicheff; but why the latter had taken an interest in the prince,
that young gentleman could not explain; probably by virtue of the old
friendship with his father, he thought.
</p>

<p>
The prince had been left an orphan when quite a little child, and Pavlicheff
had entrusted him to an old lady, a relative of his own, living in the country,
the child needing the fresh air and exercise of country life. He was educated,
first by a governess, and afterwards by a tutor, but could not remember much
about this time of his life. His fits were so frequent then, that they made
almost an idiot of him (the prince used the expression “idiot”
himself). Pavlicheff had met Professor Schneider in Berlin, and the latter had
persuaded him to send the boy to Switzerland, to Schneider’s
establishment there, for the cure of his epilepsy, and, five years before this
time, the prince was sent off. But Pavlicheff had died two or three years
since, and Schneider had himself supported the young fellow, from that day to
this, at his own expense. Although he had not quite cured him, he had greatly
improved his condition; and now, at last, at the prince’s own desire, and
because of a certain matter which came to the ears of the latter, Schneider had
despatched the young man to Russia.
</p>

<p>
The general was much astonished.
</p>

<p>
“Then you have no one, absolutely <i>no</i> one in Russia?” he
asked.
</p>

<p>
“No one, at present; but I hope to make friends; and then I have a letter
from—”
</p>

<p>
“At all events,” put in the general, not listening to the news
about the letter, “at all events, you must have learned <i>something</i>,
and your malady would not prevent your undertaking some easy work, in one of
the departments, for instance?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh dear no, oh no! As for a situation, I should much like to find one
for I am anxious to discover what I really am fit for. I have learned a good
deal in the last four years, and, besides, I read a great many Russian
books.”
</p>

<p>
“Russian books, indeed? Then, of course, you can read and write quite
correctly?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh dear, yes!”
</p>

<p>
“Capital! And your handwriting?”
</p>

<p>
“Ah, there I am <i>really</i> talented! I may say I am a real
caligraphist. Let me write you something, just to show you,” said the
prince, with some excitement.
</p>

<p>
“With pleasure! In fact, it is very necessary. I like your readiness,
prince; in fact, I must say—I—I—like you very well,
altogether,” said the general.
</p>

<p>
“What delightful writing materials you have here, such a lot of pencils
and things, and what beautiful paper! It’s a charming room altogether. I
know that picture, it’s a Swiss view. I’m sure the artist painted
it from nature, and that I have seen the very place—”
</p>

<p>
“Quite likely, though I bought it here. Gania, give the prince some
paper. Here are pens and paper; now then, take this table. What’s
this?” the general continued to Gania, who had that moment taken a large
photograph out of his portfolio, and shown it to his senior. “Halloa!
Nastasia Philipovna! Did she send it you herself? Herself?” he inquired,
with much curiosity and great animation.
</p>

<p>
“She gave it me just now, when I called in to congratulate her. I asked
her for it long ago. I don’t know whether she meant it for a hint that I
had come empty-handed, without a present for her birthday, or what,”
added Gania, with an unpleasant smile.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, nonsense, nonsense,” said the general, with decision.
“What extraordinary ideas you have, Gania! As if she would hint;
that’s not her way at all. Besides, what could <i>you</i> give her,
without having thousands at your disposal? You might have given her your
portrait, however. Has she ever asked you for it?”
</p>

<p>
“No, not yet. Very likely she never will. I suppose you haven’t
forgotten about tonight, have you, Ivan Fedorovitch? You were one of those
specially invited, you know.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh no, I remember all right, and I shall go, of course. I should think
so! She’s twenty-five years old today! And, you know, Gania, you must be
ready for great things; she has promised both myself and Afanasy Ivanovitch
that she will give a decided answer tonight, yes or no. So be prepared!”
</p>

<p>
Gania suddenly became so ill at ease that his face grew paler than ever.
</p>

<p>
“Are you sure she said that?” he asked, and his voice seemed to
quiver as he spoke.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, she promised. We both worried her so that she gave in; but she
wished us to tell you nothing about it until the day.”
</p>

<p>
The general watched Gania’s confusion intently, and clearly did not like
it.
</p>

<p>
“Remember, Ivan Fedorovitch,” said Gania, in great agitation,
“that I was to be free too, until her decision; and that even then I was
to have my ‘yes or no’ free.”
</p>

<p>
“Why, don’t you, aren’t you—” began the general,
in alarm.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, don’t misunderstand—”
</p>

<p>
“But, my dear fellow, what are you doing, what do you mean?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, I’m not rejecting her. I may have expressed myself badly, but
I didn’t mean that.”
</p>

<p>
“Reject her! I should think not!” said the general with annoyance,
and apparently not in the least anxious to conceal it. “Why, my dear
fellow, it’s not a question of your rejecting her, it is whether you are
prepared to receive her consent joyfully, and with proper satisfaction. How are
things going on at home?”
</p>

<p>
“At home? Oh, I can do as I like there, of course; only my father will
make a fool of himself, as usual. He is rapidly becoming a general nuisance. I
don’t ever talk to him now, but I hold him in check, safe enough. I swear
if it had not been for my mother, I should have shown him the way out, long
ago. My mother is always crying, of course, and my sister sulks. I had to tell
them at last that I intended to be master of my own destiny, and that I expect
to be obeyed at home. At least, I gave my sister to understand as much, and my
mother was present.”
</p>

<p>
“Well, I must say, I cannot understand it!” said the general,
shrugging his shoulders and dropping his hands. “You remember your
mother, Nina Alexandrovna, that day she came and sat here and groaned—and
when I asked her what was the matter, she says, ‘Oh, it’s such a
<i>dishonour</i> to us!’ dishonour! Stuff and nonsense! I should like to
know who can reproach Nastasia Philipovna, or who can say a word of any kind
against her. Did she mean because Nastasia had been living with Totski? What
nonsense it is! You would not let her come near your daughters, says Nina
Alexandrovna. What next, I wonder? I don’t see how she can fail
to—to understand—”
</p>

<p>
“Her own position?” prompted Gania. “She does understand.
Don’t be annoyed with her. I have warned her not to meddle in other
people’s affairs. However, although there’s comparative peace at
home at present, the storm will break if anything is finally settled
tonight.”
</p>

<p>
The prince heard the whole of the foregoing conversation, as he sat at the
table, writing. He finished at last, and brought the result of his labour to
the general’s desk.
</p>

<p>
“So this is Nastasia Philipovna,” he said, looking attentively and
curiously at the portrait. “How wonderfully beautiful!” he
immediately added, with warmth. The picture was certainly that of an unusually
lovely woman. She was photographed in a black silk dress of simple design, her
hair was evidently dark and plainly arranged, her eyes were deep and
thoughtful, the expression of her face passionate, but proud. She was rather
thin, perhaps, and a little pale. Both Gania and the general gazed at the
prince in amazement.
</p>

<p>
“How do you know it’s Nastasia Philipovna?” asked the
general; “you surely don’t know her already, do you?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I do! I have only been one day in Russia, but I have heard of the
great beauty!” And the prince proceeded to narrate his meeting with
Rogojin in the train and the whole of the latter’s story.
</p>

<p>
“There’s news!” said the general in some excitement, after
listening to the story with engrossed attention.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, of course it’s nothing but humbug!” cried Gania, a
little disturbed, however. “It’s all humbug; the young merchant was
pleased to indulge in a little innocent recreation! I have heard something of
Rogojin!”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, so have I!” replied the general. “Nastasia Philipovna
told us all about the earrings that very day. But now it is quite a different
matter. You see the fellow really has a million of roubles, and he is
passionately in love. The whole story smells of passion, and we all know what
this class of gentry is capable of when infatuated. I am much afraid of some
disagreeable scandal, I am indeed!”
</p>

<p>
“You are afraid of the million, I suppose,” said Gania, grinning
and showing his teeth.
</p>

<p>
“And you are <i>not</i>, I presume, eh?”
</p>

<p>
“How did he strike you, prince?” asked Gania, suddenly. “Did
he seem to be a serious sort of a man, or just a common rowdy fellow? What was
your own opinion about the matter?”
</p>

<p>
While Gania put this question, a new idea suddenly flashed into his brain, and
blazed out, impatiently, in his eyes. The general, who was really agitated and
disturbed, looked at the prince too, but did not seem to expect much from his
reply.
</p>

<p>
“I really don’t quite know how to tell you,” replied the
prince, “but it certainly did seem to me that the man was full of
passion, and not, perhaps, quite healthy passion. He seemed to be still far
from well. Very likely he will be in bed again in a day or two, especially if
he lives fast.”
</p>

<p>
“No! do you think so?” said the general, catching at the idea.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I do think so!”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, but the sort of scandal I referred to may happen at any moment. It
may be this very evening,” remarked Gania to the general, with a smile.
</p>

<p>
“Of course; quite so. In that case it all depends upon what is going on
in her brain at this moment.”
</p>

<p>
“You know the kind of person she is at times.”
</p>

<p>
“How? What kind of person is she?” cried the general, arrived at
the limits of his patience. “Look here, Gania, don’t you go
annoying her tonight. What you are to do is to be as agreeable towards her as
ever you can. Well, what are you smiling at? You must understand, Gania, that I
have no interest whatever in speaking like this. Whichever way the question is
settled, it will be to my advantage. Nothing will move Totski from his
resolution, so I run no risk. If there is anything I desire, you must know that
it is your benefit only. Can’t you trust me? You are a sensible fellow,
and I have been counting on you; for, in this matter, that, that—”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, that’s the chief thing,” said Gania, helping the
general out of his difficulties again, and curling his lips in an envenomed
smile, which he did not attempt to conceal. He gazed with his fevered eyes
straight into those of the general, as though he were anxious that the latter
might read his thoughts.
</p>

<p>
The general grew purple with anger.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, of course it is the chief thing!” he cried, looking sharply
at Gania. “What a very curious man you are, Gania! You actually seem to
be <i>glad</i> to hear of this millionaire fellow’s arrival—just as
though you wished for an excuse to get out of the whole thing. This is an
affair in which you ought to act honestly with both sides, and give due
warning, to avoid compromising others. But, even now, there is still time. Do
you understand me? I wish to know whether you desire this arrangement or
whether you do not? If not, say so,—and—and welcome! No one is
trying to force you into the snare, Gavrila Ardalionovitch, if you see a snare
in the matter, at least.”
</p>

<p>
“I do desire it,” murmured Gania, softly but firmly, lowering his
eyes; and he relapsed into gloomy silence.
</p>

<p>
The general was satisfied. He had excited himself, and was evidently now
regretting that he had gone so far. He turned to the prince, and suddenly the
disagreeable thought of the latter’s presence struck him, and the
certainty that he must have heard every word of the conversation. But he felt
at ease in another moment; it only needed one glance at the prince to see that
in that quarter there was nothing to fear.
</p>

<p>
“Oh!” cried the general, catching sight of the prince’s
specimen of caligraphy, which the latter had now handed him for inspection.
“Why, this is simply beautiful; look at that, Gania, there’s real
talent there!”
</p>

<p>
On a sheet of thick writing-paper the prince had written in medieval characters
the legend:
</p>

<p>
“The gentle Abbot Pafnute signed this.”
</p>

<p>
“There,” explained the prince, with great delight and animation,
“there, that’s the abbot’s real signature—from a
manuscript of the fourteenth century. All these old abbots and bishops used to
write most beautifully, with such taste and so much care and diligence. Have
you no copy of Pogodin, general? If you had one I could show you another type.
Stop a bit—here you have the large round writing common in France during
the eighteenth century. Some of the letters are shaped quite differently from
those now in use. It was the writing current then, and employed by public
writers generally. I copied this from one of them, and you can see how good it
is. Look at the well-rounded a and d. I have tried to translate the French
character into the Russian letters—a difficult thing to do, but I think I
have succeeded fairly. Here is a fine sentence, written in a good, original
hand—‘Zeal triumphs over all.’ That is the script of the
Russian War Office. That is how official documents addressed to important
personages should be written. The letters are round, the type black, and the
style somewhat remarkable. A stylist would not allow these ornaments, or
attempts at flourishes—just look at these unfinished tails!—but it
has distinction and really depicts the soul of the writer. He would like to
give play to his imagination, and follow the inspiration of his genius, but a
soldier is only at ease in the guard-room, and the pen stops half-way, a slave
to discipline. How delightful! The first time I met an example of this
handwriting, I was positively astonished, and where do you think I chanced to
find it? In Switzerland, of all places! Now that is an ordinary English hand.
It can hardly be improved, it is so refined and exquisite—almost
perfection. This is an example of another kind, a mixture of styles. The copy
was given me by a French commercial traveller. It is founded on the English,
but the downstrokes are a little blacker, and more marked. Notice that the oval
has some slight modification—it is more rounded. This writing allows for
flourishes; now a flourish is a dangerous thing! Its use requires such taste,
but, if successful, what a distinction it gives to the whole! It results in an
incomparable type—one to fall in love with!”
</p>

<p>
“Dear me! How you have gone into all the refinements and details of the
question! Why, my dear fellow, you are not a caligraphist, you are an artist!
Eh, Gania?”
</p>

<p>
“Wonderful!” said Gania. “And he knows it too,” he
added, with a sarcastic smile.
</p>

<p>
“You may smile,—but there’s a career in this,” said the
general. “You don’t know what a great personage I shall show this
to, prince. Why, you can command a situation at thirty-five roubles per month
to start with. However, it’s half-past twelve,” he concluded,
looking at his watch; “so to business, prince, for I must be setting to
work and shall not see you again today. Sit down a minute. I have told you that
I cannot receive you myself very often, but I should like to be of some
assistance to you, some small assistance, of a kind that would give you
satisfaction. I shall find you a place in one of the State departments, an easy
place—but you will require to be accurate. Now, as to your plans—in
the house, or rather in the family of Gania here—my young friend, whom I
hope you will know better—his mother and sister have prepared two or
three rooms for lodgers, and let them to highly recommended young fellows, with
board and attendance. I am sure Nina Alexandrovna will take you in on my
recommendation. There you will be comfortable and well taken care of; for I do
not think, prince, that you are the sort of man to be left to the mercy of Fate
in a town like Petersburg. Nina Alexandrovna, Gania’s mother, and Varvara
Alexandrovna, are ladies for whom I have the highest possible esteem and
respect. Nina Alexandrovna is the wife of General Ardalion Alexandrovitch, my
old brother in arms, with whom, I regret to say, on account of certain
circumstances, I am no longer acquainted. I give you all this information,
prince, in order to make it clear to you that I am personally recommending you
to this family, and that in so doing, I am more or less taking upon myself to
answer for you. The terms are most reasonable, and I trust that your salary
will very shortly prove amply sufficient for your expenditure. Of course
pocket-money is a necessity, if only a little; do not be angry, prince, if I
strongly recommend you to avoid carrying money in your pocket. But as your
purse is quite empty at the present moment, you must allow me to press these
twenty-five roubles upon your acceptance, as something to begin with. Of course
we will settle this little matter another time, and if you are the upright,
honest man you look, I anticipate very little trouble between us on that score.
Taking so much interest in you as you may perceive I do, I am not without my
object, and you shall know it in good time. You see, I am perfectly candid with
you. I hope, Gania, you have nothing to say against the prince’s taking
up his abode in your house?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, on the contrary! my mother will be very glad,” said Gania,
courteously and kindly.
</p>

<p>
“I think only one of your rooms is engaged as yet, is it not? That fellow
Ferd-Ferd—”
</p>

<p>
“Ferdishenko.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes—I don’t like that Ferdishenko. I can’t understand
why Nastasia Philipovna encourages him so. Is he really her cousin, as he
says?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh dear no, it’s all a joke. No more cousin than I am.”
</p>

<p>
“Well, what do you think of the arrangement, prince?”
</p>

<p>
“Thank you, general; you have behaved very kindly to me; all the more so
since I did not ask you to help me. I don’t say that out of pride. I
certainly did not know where to lay my head tonight. Rogojin asked me to come
to his house, of course, but—”
</p>

<p>
“Rogojin? No, no, my good fellow. I should strongly recommend you,
paternally,—or, if you prefer it, as a friend,—to forget all about
Rogojin, and, in fact, to stick to the family into which you are about to
enter.”
</p>

<p>
“Thank you,” began the prince; “and since you are so very
kind there is just one matter which I—”
</p>

<p>
“You must really excuse me,” interrupted the general, “but I
positively haven’t another moment now. I shall just tell Elizabetha
Prokofievna about you, and if she wishes to receive you at once—as I
shall advise her—I strongly recommend you to ingratiate yourself with her
at the first opportunity, for my wife may be of the greatest service to you in
many ways. If she cannot receive you now, you must be content to wait till
another time. Meanwhile you, Gania, just look over these accounts, will you? We
mustn’t forget to finish off that matter—”
</p>

<p>
The general left the room, and the prince never succeeded in broaching the
business which he had on hand, though he had endeavoured to do so four times.
</p>

<p>
Gania lit a cigarette and offered one to the prince. The latter accepted the
offer, but did not talk, being unwilling to disturb Gania’s work. He
commenced to examine the study and its contents. But Gania hardly so much as
glanced at the papers lying before him; he was absent and thoughtful, and his
smile and general appearance struck the prince still more disagreeably now that
the two were left alone together.
</p>

<p>
Suddenly Gania approached our hero who was at the moment standing over Nastasia
Philipovna’s portrait, gazing at it.
</p>

<p>
“Do you admire that sort of woman, prince?” he asked, looking
intently at him. He seemed to have some special object in the question.
</p>

<p>
“It’s a wonderful face,” said the prince, “and I feel
sure that her destiny is not by any means an ordinary, uneventful one. Her face
is smiling enough, but she must have suffered terribly—hasn’t she?
Her eyes show it—those two bones there, the little points under her eyes,
just where the cheek begins. It’s a proud face too, terribly proud! And
I—I can’t say whether she is good and kind, or not. Oh, if she be
but good! That would make all well!”
</p>

<p>
“And would you marry a woman like that, now?” continued Gania,
never taking his excited eyes off the prince’s face.
</p>

<p>
“I cannot marry at all,” said the latter. “I am an
invalid.”
</p>

<p>
“Would Rogojin marry her, do you think?”
</p>

<p>
“Why not? Certainly he would, I should think. He would marry her
tomorrow!—marry her tomorrow and murder her in a week!”
</p>

<p>
Hardly had the prince uttered the last word when Gania gave such a fearful
shudder that the prince almost cried out.
</p>

<p>
“What’s the matter?” said he, seizing Gania’s hand.
</p>

<p>
“Your highness! His excellency begs your presence in her
excellency’s apartments!” announced the footman, appearing at the
door.
</p>

<p>
The prince immediately followed the man out of the room.
</p>

<h3>IV.</h3>

<p>
All three of the Miss Epanchins were fine, healthy girls, well-grown, with good
shoulders and busts, and strong—almost masculine—hands; and, of
course, with all the above attributes, they enjoyed capital appetites, of which
they were not in the least ashamed.
</p>

<p>
Elizabetha Prokofievna sometimes informed the girls that they were a little too
candid in this matter, but in spite of their outward deference to their mother
these three young women, in solemn conclave, had long agreed to modify the
unquestioning obedience which they had been in the habit of according to her;
and Mrs. General Epanchin had judged it better to say nothing about it, though,
of course, she was well aware of the fact.
</p>

<p>
It is true that her nature sometimes rebelled against these dictates of reason,
and that she grew yearly more capricious and impatient; but having a respectful
and well-disciplined husband under her thumb at all times, she found it
possible, as a rule, to empty any little accumulations of spleen upon his head,
and therefore the harmony of the family was kept duly balanced, and things went
as smoothly as family matters can.
</p>

<p>
Mrs. Epanchin had a fair appetite herself, and generally took her share of the
capital mid-day lunch which was always served for the girls, and which was
nearly as good as a dinner. The young ladies used to have a cup of coffee each
before this meal, at ten o’clock, while still in bed. This was a
favourite and unalterable arrangement with them. At half-past twelve, the table
was laid in the small dining-room, and occasionally the general himself
appeared at the family gathering, if he had time.
</p>

<p>
Besides tea and coffee, cheese, honey, butter, pan-cakes of various kinds (the
lady of the house loved these best), cutlets, and so on, there was generally
strong beef soup, and other substantial delicacies.
</p>

<p>
On the particular morning on which our story has opened, the family had
assembled in the dining-room, and were waiting the general’s appearance,
the latter having promised to come this day. If he had been one moment late, he
would have been sent for at once; but he turned up punctually.
</p>

<p>
As he came forward to wish his wife good-morning and kiss her hands, as his
custom was, he observed something in her look which boded ill. He thought he
knew the reason, and had expected it, but still, he was not altogether
comfortable. His daughters advanced to kiss him, too, and though they did not
look exactly angry, there was something strange in their expression as well.
</p>

<p>
The general was, owing to certain circumstances, a little inclined to be too
suspicious at home, and needlessly nervous; but, as an experienced father and
husband, he judged it better to take measures at once to protect himself from
any dangers there might be in the air.
</p>

<p>
However, I hope I shall not interfere with the proper sequence of my narrative
too much, if I diverge for a moment at this point, in order to explain the
mutual relations between General Epanchin’s family and others acting a
part in this history, at the time when we take up the thread of their destiny.
I have already stated that the general, though he was a man of lowly origin,
and of poor education, was, for all that, an experienced and talented husband
and father. Among other things, he considered it undesirable to hurry his
daughters to the matrimonial altar and to worry them too much with assurances
of his paternal wishes for their happiness, as is the custom among parents of
many grown-up daughters. He even succeeded in ranging his wife on his side on
this question, though he found the feat very difficult to accomplish, because
unnatural; but the general’s arguments were conclusive, and founded upon
obvious facts. The general considered that the girls’ taste and good
sense should be allowed to develop and mature deliberately, and that the
parents’ duty should merely be to keep watch, in order that no strange or
undesirable choice be made; but that the selection once effected, both father
and mother were bound from that moment to enter heart and soul into the cause,
and to see that the matter progressed without hindrance until the altar should
be happily reached.
</p>

<p>
Besides this, it was clear that the Epanchins’ position gained each year,
with geometrical accuracy, both as to financial solidity and social weight;
and, therefore, the longer the girls waited, the better was their chance of
making a brilliant match.
</p>

<p>
But again, amidst the incontrovertible facts just recorded, one more, equally
significant, rose up to confront the family; and this was, that the eldest
daughter, Alexandra, had imperceptibly arrived at her twenty-fifth birthday.
Almost at the same moment, Afanasy Ivanovitch Totski, a man of immense wealth,
high connections, and good standing, announced his intention of marrying.
Afanasy Ivanovitch was a gentleman of fifty-five years of age, artistically
gifted, and of most refined tastes. He wished to marry well, and, moreover, he
was a keen admirer and judge of beauty.
</p>

<p>
Now, since Totski had, of late, been upon terms of great cordiality with
Epanchin, which excellent relations were intensified by the fact that they
were, so to speak, partners in several financial enterprises, it so happened
that the former now put in a friendly request to the general for counsel with
regard to the important step he meditated. Might he suggest, for instance, such
a thing as a marriage between himself and one of the general’s daughters?
</p>

<p>
Evidently the quiet, pleasant current of the family life of the Epanchins was
about to undergo a change.
</p>

<p>
The undoubted beauty of the family, <i>par excellence</i>, was the youngest,
Aglaya, as aforesaid. But Totski himself, though an egotist of the extremest
type, realized that he had no chance there; Aglaya was clearly not for such as
he.
</p>

<p>
Perhaps the sisterly love and friendship of the three girls had more or less
exaggerated Aglaya’s chances of happiness. In their opinion, the
latter’s destiny was not merely to be very happy; she was to live in a
heaven on earth. Aglaya’s husband was to be a compendium of all the
virtues, and of all success, not to speak of fabulous wealth. The two elder
sisters had agreed that all was to be sacrificed by them, if need be, for
Aglaya’s sake; her dowry was to be colossal and unprecedented.
</p>

<p>
The general and his wife were aware of this agreement, and, therefore, when
Totski suggested himself for one of the sisters, the parents made no doubt that
one of the two elder girls would probably accept the offer, since Totski would
certainly make no difficulty as to dowry. The general valued the proposal very
highly. He knew life, and realized what such an offer was worth.
</p>

<p>
The answer of the sisters to the communication was, if not conclusive, at least
consoling and hopeful. It made known that the eldest, Alexandra, would very
likely be disposed to listen to a proposal.
</p>

<p>
Alexandra was a good-natured girl, though she had a will of her own. She was
intelligent and kind-hearted, and, if she were to marry Totski, she would make
him a good wife. She did not care for a brilliant marriage; she was eminently a
woman calculated to soothe and sweeten the life of any man; decidedly pretty,
if not absolutely handsome. What better could Totski wish?
</p>

<p>
So the matter crept slowly forward. The general and Totski had agreed to avoid
any hasty and irrevocable step. Alexandra’s parents had not even begun to
talk to their daughters freely upon the subject, when suddenly, as it were, a
dissonant chord was struck amid the harmony of the proceedings. Mrs. Epanchin
began to show signs of discontent, and that was a serious matter. A certain
circumstance had crept in, a disagreeable and troublesome factor, which
threatened to overturn the whole business.
</p>

<p>
This circumstance had come into existence eighteen years before. Close to an
estate of Totski’s, in one of the central provinces of Russia, there
lived, at that time, a poor gentleman whose estate was of the wretchedest
description. This gentleman was noted in the district for his persistent
ill-fortune; his name was Barashkoff, and, as regards family and descent, he
was vastly superior to Totski, but his estate was mortgaged to the last acre.
One day, when he had ridden over to the town to see a creditor, the chief
peasant of his village followed him shortly after, with the news that his house
had been burnt down, and that his wife had perished with it, but his children
were safe.
</p>

<p>
Even Barashkoff, inured to the storms of evil fortune as he was, could not
stand this last stroke. He went mad and died shortly after in the town
hospital. His estate was sold for the creditors; and the little girls—two
of them, of seven and eight years of age respectively,—were adopted by
Totski, who undertook their maintenance and education in the kindness of his
heart. They were brought up together with the children of his German bailiff.
Very soon, however, there was only one of them left—Nastasia
Philipovna—for the other little one died of whooping-cough. Totski, who
was living abroad at this time, very soon forgot all about the child; but five
years after, returning to Russia, it struck him that he would like to look over
his estate and see how matters were going there, and, arrived at his
bailiff’s house, he was not long in discovering that among the children
of the latter there now dwelt a most lovely little girl of twelve, sweet and
intelligent, and bright, and promising to develop beauty of most unusual
quality—as to which last Totski was an undoubted authority.
</p>

<p>
He only stayed at his country seat a few days on this occasion, but he had time
to make his arrangements. Great changes took place in the child’s
education; a good governess was engaged, a Swiss lady of experience and
culture. For four years this lady resided in the house with little Nastia, and
then the education was considered complete. The governess took her departure,
and another lady came down to fetch Nastia, by Totski’s instructions. The
child was now transported to another of Totski’s estates in a distant
part of the country. Here she found a delightful little house, just built, and
prepared for her reception with great care and taste; and here she took up her
abode together with the lady who had accompanied her from her old home. In the
house there were two experienced maids, musical instruments of all sorts, a
charming “young lady’s library,” pictures, paint-boxes, a
lap-dog, and everything to make life agreeable. Within a fortnight Totski
himself arrived, and from that time he appeared to have taken a great fancy to
this part of the world and came down each summer, staying two and three months
at a time. So passed four years peacefully and happily, in charming
surroundings.
</p>

<p>
At the end of that time, and about four months after Totski’s last visit
(he had stayed but a fortnight on this occasion), a report reached Nastasia
Philipovna that he was about to be married in St. Petersburg, to a rich,
eminent, and lovely woman. The report was only partially true, the marriage
project being only in an embryo condition; but a great change now came over
Nastasia Philipovna. She suddenly displayed unusual decision of character; and
without wasting time in thought, she left her country home and came up to St.
Petersburg, straight to Totski’s house, all alone.
</p>

<p>
The latter, amazed at her conduct, began to express his displeasure; but he
very soon became aware that he must change his voice, style, and everything
else, with this young lady; the good old times were gone. An entirely new and
different woman sat before him, between whom and the girl he had left in the
country last July there seemed nothing in common.
</p>

<p>
In the first place, this new woman understood a good deal more than was usual
for young people of her age; so much indeed, that Totski could not help
wondering where she had picked up her knowledge. Surely not from her
“young lady’s library”? It even embraced legal matters, and
the “world” in general, to a considerable extent.
</p>

<p>
Her character was absolutely changed. No more of the girlish alternations of
timidity and petulance, the adorable naivete, the reveries, the tears, the
playfulness... It was an entirely new and hitherto unknown being who now sat
and laughed at him, and informed him to his face that she had never had the
faintest feeling for him of any kind, except loathing and
contempt—contempt which had followed closely upon her sensations of
surprise and bewilderment after her first acquaintance with him.
</p>

<p>
This new woman gave him further to understand that though it was absolutely the
same to her whom he married, yet she had decided to prevent this
marriage—for no particular reason, but that she <i>chose</i> to do so,
and because she wished to amuse herself at his expense for that it was
“quite her turn to laugh a little now!”
</p>

<p>
Such were her words—very likely she did not give her real reason for this
eccentric conduct; but, at all events, that was all the explanation she deigned
to offer.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile, Totski thought the matter over as well as his scattered ideas would
permit. His meditations lasted a fortnight, however, and at the end of that
time his resolution was taken. The fact was, Totski was at that time a man of
fifty years of age; his position was solid and respectable; his place in
society had long been firmly fixed upon safe foundations; he loved himself, his
personal comforts, and his position better than all the world, as every
respectable gentleman should!
</p>

<p>
At the same time his grasp of things in general soon showed Totski that he now
had to deal with a being who was outside the pale of the ordinary rules of
traditional behaviour, and who would not only threaten mischief but would
undoubtedly carry it out, and stop for no one.
</p>

<p>
There was evidently, he concluded, something at work here; some storm of the
mind, some paroxysm of romantic anger, goodness knows against whom or what,
some insatiable contempt—in a word, something altogether absurd and
impossible, but at the same time most dangerous to be met with by any
respectable person with a position in society to keep up.
</p>

<p>
For a man of Totski’s wealth and standing, it would, of course, have been
the simplest possible matter to take steps which would rid him at once from all
annoyance; while it was obviously impossible for Nastasia Philipovna to harm
him in any way, either legally or by stirring up a scandal, for, in case of the
latter danger, he could so easily remove her to a sphere of safety. However,
these arguments would only hold good in case of Nastasia acting as others might
in such an emergency. She was much more likely to overstep the bounds of
reasonable conduct by some extraordinary eccentricity.
</p>

<p>
Here the sound judgment of Totski stood him in good stead. He realized that
Nastasia Philipovna must be well aware that she could do nothing by legal means
to injure him, and that her flashing eyes betrayed some entirely different
intention.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia Philipovna was quite capable of ruining herself, and even of
perpetrating something which would send her to Siberia, for the mere pleasure
of injuring a man for whom she had developed so inhuman a sense of loathing and
contempt. He had sufficient insight to understand that she valued nothing in
the world—herself least of all—and he made no attempt to conceal
the fact that he was a coward in some respects. For instance, if he had been
told that he would be stabbed at the altar, or publicly insulted, he would
undoubtedly have been frightened; but not so much at the idea of being
murdered, or wounded, or insulted, as at the thought that if such things were
to happen he would be made to look ridiculous in the eyes of society.
</p>

<p>
He knew well that Nastasia thoroughly understood him and where to wound him and
how, and therefore, as the marriage was still only in embryo, Totski decided to
conciliate her by giving it up. His decision was strengthened by the fact that
Nastasia Philipovna had curiously altered of late. It would be difficult to
conceive how different she was physically, at the present time, to the girl of
a few years ago. She was pretty then... but now!... Totski laughed angrily when
he thought how short-sighted he had been. In days gone by he remembered how he
had looked at her beautiful eyes, how even then he had marvelled at their dark
mysterious depths, and at their wondering gaze which seemed to seek an answer
to some unknown riddle. Her complexion also had altered. She was now
exceedingly pale, but, curiously, this change only made her more beautiful.
Like most men of the world, Totski had rather despised such a cheaply-bought
conquest, but of late years he had begun to think differently about it. It had
struck him as long ago as last spring that he ought to be finding a good match
for Nastasia; for instance, some respectable and reasonable young fellow
serving in a government office in another part of the country. How maliciously
Nastasia laughed at the idea of such a thing, now!
</p>

<p>
However, it appeared to Totski that he might make use of her in another way;
and he determined to establish her in St. Petersburg, surrounding her with all
the comforts and luxuries that his wealth could command. In this way he might
gain glory in certain circles.
</p>

<p>
Five years of this Petersburg life went by, and, of course, during that time a
great deal happened. Totski’s position was very uncomfortable; having
“funked” once, he could not totally regain his ease. He was afraid,
he did not know why, but he was simply <i>afraid</i> of Nastasia Philipovna.
For the first two years or so he had suspected that she wished to marry him
herself, and that only her vanity prevented her telling him so. He thought that
she wanted him to approach her with a humble proposal from his own side. But to
his great, and not entirely pleasurable amazement, he discovered that this was
by no means the case, and that were he to offer himself he would be refused. He
could not understand such a state of things, and was obliged to conclude that
it was pride, the pride of an injured and imaginative woman, which had gone to
such lengths that it preferred to sit and nurse its contempt and hatred in
solitude rather than mount to heights of hitherto unattainable splendour. To
make matters worse, she was quite impervious to mercenary considerations, and
could not be bribed in any way.
</p>

<p>
Finally, Totski took cunning means to try to break his chains and be free. He
tried to tempt her in various ways to lose her heart; he invited princes,
hussars, secretaries of embassies, poets, novelists, even Socialists, to see
her; but not one of them all made the faintest impression upon Nastasia. It was
as though she had a pebble in place of a heart, as though her feelings and
affections were dried up and withered for ever.
</p>

<p>
She lived almost entirely alone; she read, she studied, she loved music. Her
principal acquaintances were poor women of various grades, a couple of
actresses, and the family of a poor schoolteacher. Among these people she was
much beloved.
</p>

<p>
She received four or five friends sometimes, of an evening. Totski often came.
Lately, too, General Epanchin had been enabled with great difficulty to
introduce himself into her circle. Gania made her acquaintance also, and others
were Ferdishenko, an ill-bred, and would-be witty, young clerk, and Ptitsin, a
money-lender of modest and polished manners, who had risen from poverty. In
fact, Nastasia Philipovna’s beauty became a thing known to all the town;
but not a single man could boast of anything more than his own admiration for
her; and this reputation of hers, and her wit and culture and grace, all
confirmed Totski in the plan he had now prepared.
</p>

<p>
And it was at this moment that General Epanchin began to play so large and
important a part in the story.
</p>

<p>
When Totski had approached the general with his request for friendly counsel as
to a marriage with one of his daughters, he had made a full and candid
confession. He had said that he intended to stop at no means to obtain his
freedom; even if Nastasia were to promise to leave him entirely alone in
future, he would not (he said) believe and trust her; words were not enough for
him; he must have solid guarantees of some sort. So he and the general
determined to try what an attempt to appeal to her heart would effect. Having
arrived at Nastasia’s house one day, with Epanchin, Totski immediately
began to speak of the intolerable torment of his position. He admitted that he
was to blame for all, but candidly confessed that he could not bring himself to
feel any remorse for his original guilt towards herself, because he was a man
of sensual passions which were inborn and ineradicable, and that he had no
power over himself in this respect; but that he wished, seriously, to marry at
last, and that the whole fate of the most desirable social union which he
contemplated, was in her hands; in a word, he confided his all to her
generosity of heart.
</p>

<p>
General Epanchin took up his part and spoke in the character of father of a
family; he spoke sensibly, and without wasting words over any attempt at
sentimentality, he merely recorded his full admission of her right to be the
arbiter of Totski’s destiny at this moment. He then pointed out that the
fate of his daughter, and very likely of both his other daughters, now hung
upon her reply.
</p>

<p>
To Nastasia’s question as to what they wished her to do, Totski confessed
that he had been so frightened by her, five years ago, that he could never now
be entirely comfortable until she herself married. He immediately added that
such a suggestion from him would, of course, be absurd, unless accompanied by
remarks of a more pointed nature. He very well knew, he said, that a certain
young gentleman of good family, namely, Gavrila Ardalionovitch Ivolgin, with
whom she was acquainted, and whom she received at her house, had long loved her
passionately, and would give his life for some response from her. The young
fellow had confessed this love of his to him (Totski) and had also admitted it
in the hearing of his benefactor, General Epanchin. Lastly, he could not help
being of opinion that Nastasia must be aware of Gania’s love for her, and
if he (Totski) mistook not, she had looked with some favour upon it, being
often lonely, and rather tired of her present life. Having remarked how
difficult it was for him, of all people, to speak to her of these matters,
Totski concluded by saying that he trusted Nastasia Philipovna would not look
with contempt upon him if he now expressed his sincere desire to guarantee her
future by a gift of seventy-five thousand roubles. He added that the sum would
have been left her all the same in his will, and that therefore she must not
consider the gift as in any way an indemnification to her for anything, but
that there was no reason, after all, why a man should not be allowed to
entertain a natural desire to lighten his conscience, etc., etc.; in fact, all
that would naturally be said under the circumstances. Totski was very eloquent
all through, and, in conclusion, just touched on the fact that not a soul in
the world, not even General Epanchin, had ever heard a word about the above
seventy-five thousand roubles, and that this was the first time he had ever
given expression to his intentions in respect to them.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia Philipovna’s reply to this long rigmarole astonished both the
friends considerably.
</p>

<p>
Not only was there no trace of her former irony, of her old hatred and enmity,
and of that dreadful laughter, the very recollection of which sent a cold chill
down Totski’s back to this very day; but she seemed charmed and really
glad to have the opportunity of talking seriously with him for once in a way.
She confessed that she had long wished to have a frank and free conversation
and to ask for friendly advice, but that pride had hitherto prevented her; now,
however, that the ice was broken, nothing could be more welcome to her than
this opportunity.
</p>

<p>
First, with a sad smile, and then with a twinkle of merriment in her eyes, she
admitted that such a storm as that of five years ago was now quite out of the
question. She said that she had long since changed her views of things, and
recognized that facts must be taken into consideration in spite of the feelings
of the heart. What was done was done and ended, and she could not understand
why Totski should still feel alarmed.
</p>

<p>
She next turned to General Epanchin and observed, most courteously, that she
had long since known of his daughters, and that she had heard none but good
report; that she had learned to think of them with deep and sincere respect.
The idea alone that she could in any way serve them, would be to her both a
pride and a source of real happiness.
</p>

<p>
It was true that she was lonely in her present life; Totski had judged her
thoughts aright. She longed to rise, if not to love, at least to family life
and new hopes and objects, but as to Gavrila Ardalionovitch, she could not as
yet say much. She thought it must be the case that he loved her; she felt that
she too might learn to love him, if she could be sure of the firmness of his
attachment to herself; but he was very young, and it was a difficult question
to decide. What she specially liked about him was that he worked, and supported
his family by his toil.
</p>

<p>
She had heard that he was proud and ambitious; she had heard much that was
interesting of his mother and sister, she had heard of them from Mr. Ptitsin,
and would much like to make their acquaintance, but—another
question!—would they like to receive her into their house? At all events,
though she did not reject the idea of this marriage, she desired not to be
hurried. As for the seventy-five thousand roubles, Mr. Totski need not have
found any difficulty or awkwardness about the matter; she quite understood the
value of money, and would, of course, accept the gift. She thanked him for his
delicacy, however, but saw no reason why Gavrila Ardalionovitch should not know
about it.
</p>

<p>
She would not marry the latter, she said, until she felt persuaded that neither
on his part nor on the part of his family did there exist any sort of concealed
suspicions as to herself. She did not intend to ask forgiveness for anything in
the past, which fact she desired to be known. She did not consider herself to
blame for anything that had happened in former years, and she thought that
Gavrila Ardalionovitch should be informed as to the relations which had existed
between herself and Totski during the last five years. If she accepted this
money it was not to be considered as indemnification for her misfortune as a
young girl, which had not been in any degree her own fault, but merely as
compensation for her ruined life.
</p>

<p>
She became so excited and agitated during all these explanations and
confessions that General Epanchin was highly gratified, and considered the
matter satisfactorily arranged once for all. But the once bitten Totski was
twice shy, and looked for hidden snakes among the flowers. However, the special
point to which the two friends particularly trusted to bring about their object
(namely, Gania’s attractiveness for Nastasia Philipovna), stood out more
and more prominently; the pourparlers had commenced, and gradually even Totski
began to believe in the possibility of success.
</p>

<p>
Before long Nastasia and Gania had talked the matter over. Very little was
said—her modesty seemed to suffer under the infliction of discussing such
a question. But she recognized his love, on the understanding that she bound
herself to nothing whatever, and that she reserved the right to say
“no” up to the very hour of the marriage ceremony. Gania was to
have the same right of refusal at the last moment.
</p>

<p>
It soon became clear to Gania, after scenes of wrath and quarrellings at the
domestic hearth, that his family were seriously opposed to the match, and that
Nastasia was aware of this fact was equally evident. She said nothing about it,
though he daily expected her to do so.
</p>

<p>
There were several rumours afloat, before long, which upset Totski’s
equanimity a good deal, but we will not now stop to describe them; merely
mentioning an instance or two. One was that Nastasia had entered into close and
secret relations with the Epanchin girls—a most unlikely rumour; another
was that Nastasia had long satisfied herself of the fact that Gania was merely
marrying her for money, and that his nature was gloomy and greedy, impatient
and selfish, to an extraordinary degree; and that although he had been keen
enough in his desire to achieve a conquest before, yet since the two friends
had agreed to exploit his passion for their own purposes, it was clear enough
that he had begun to consider the whole thing a nuisance and a nightmare.
</p>

<p>
In his heart passion and hate seemed to hold divided sway, and although he had
at last given his consent to marry the woman (as he said), under the stress of
circumstances, yet he promised himself that he would “take it out of
her,” after marriage.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia seemed to Totski to have divined all this, and to be preparing
something on her own account, which frightened him to such an extent that he
did not dare communicate his views even to the general. But at times he would
pluck up his courage and be full of hope and good spirits again, acting, in
fact, as weak men do act in such circumstances.
</p>

<p>
However, both the friends felt that the thing looked rosy indeed when one day
Nastasia informed them that she would give her final answer on the evening of
her birthday, which anniversary was due in a very short time.
</p>

<p>
A strange rumour began to circulate, meanwhile; no less than that the
respectable and highly respected General Epanchin was himself so fascinated by
Nastasia Philipovna that his feeling for her amounted almost to passion. What
he thought to gain by Gania’s marriage to the girl it was difficult to
imagine. Possibly he counted on Gania’s complaisance; for Totski had long
suspected that there existed some secret understanding between the general and
his secretary. At all events the fact was known that he had prepared a
magnificent present of pearls for Nastasia’s birthday, and that he was
looking forward to the occasion when he should present his gift with the
greatest excitement and impatience. The day before her birthday he was in a
fever of agitation.
</p>

<p>
Mrs. Epanchin, long accustomed to her husband’s infidelities, had heard
of the pearls, and the rumour excited her liveliest curiosity and interest. The
general remarked her suspicions, and felt that a grand explanation must shortly
take place—which fact alarmed him much.
</p>

<p>
This is the reason why he was so unwilling to take lunch (on the morning upon
which we took up this narrative) with the rest of his family. Before the
prince’s arrival he had made up his mind to plead business, and
“cut” the meal; which simply meant running away.
</p>

<p>
He was particularly anxious that this one day should be passed—especially
the evening—without unpleasantness between himself and his family; and
just at the right moment the prince turned up—“as though Heaven had
sent him on purpose,” said the general to himself, as he left the study
to seek out the wife of his bosom.
</p>

<h3>V.</h3>

<p>
Mrs. General Epanchin was a proud woman by nature. What must her feelings have
been when she heard that Prince Muishkin, the last of his and her line, had
arrived in beggar’s guise, a wretched idiot, a recipient of
charity—all of which details the general gave out for greater effect! He
was anxious to steal her interest at the first swoop, so as to distract her
thoughts from other matters nearer home.
</p>

<p>
Mrs. Epanchin was in the habit of holding herself very straight, and staring
before her, without speaking, in moments of excitement.
</p>

<p>
She was a fine woman of the same age as her husband, with a slightly hooked
nose, a high, narrow forehead, thick hair turning a little grey, and a sallow
complexion. Her eyes were grey and wore a very curious expression at times. She
believed them to be most effective—a belief that nothing could alter.
</p>

<p>
“What, receive him! Now, at once?” asked Mrs. Epanchin, gazing
vaguely at her husband as he stood fidgeting before her.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, dear me, I assure you there is no need to stand on ceremony with
him,” the general explained hastily. “He is quite a child, not to
say a pathetic-looking creature. He has fits of some sort, and has just arrived
from Switzerland, straight from the station, dressed like a German and without
a farthing in his pocket. I gave him twenty-five roubles to go on with, and am
going to find him some easy place in one of the government offices. I should
like you to ply him well with the victuals, my dears, for I should think he
must be very hungry.”
</p>

<p>
“You astonish me,” said the lady, gazing as before. “Fits,
and hungry too! What sort of fits?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, they don’t come on frequently, besides, he’s a regular
child, though he seems to be fairly educated. I should like you, if possible,
my dears,” the general added, making slowly for the door, “to put
him through his paces a bit, and see what he is good for. I think you should be
kind to him; it is a good deed, you know—however, just as you like, of
course—but he is a sort of relation, remember, and I thought it might
interest you to see the young fellow, seeing that this is so.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, of course, mamma, if we needn’t stand on ceremony with him, we
must give the poor fellow something to eat after his journey; especially as he
has not the least idea where to go to,” said Alexandra, the eldest of the
girls.
</p>

<p>
“Besides, he’s quite a child; we can entertain him with a little
hide-and-seek, in case of need,” said Adelaida.
</p>

<p>
“Hide-and-seek? What do you mean?” inquired Mrs. Epanchin.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, do stop pretending, mamma,” cried Aglaya, in vexation.
“Send him up, father; mother allows.”
</p>

<p>
The general rang the bell and gave orders that the prince should be shown in.
</p>

<p>
“Only on condition that he has a napkin under his chin at lunch,
then,” said Mrs. Epanchin, “and let Fedor, or Mavra, stand behind
him while he eats. Is he quiet when he has these fits? He doesn’t show
violence, does he?”
</p>

<p>
“On the contrary, he seems to be very well brought up. His manners are
excellent—but here he is himself. Here you are, prince—let me
introduce you, the last of the Muishkins, a relative of your own, my dear, or
at least of the same name. Receive him kindly, please. They’ll bring in
lunch directly, prince; you must stop and have some, but you must excuse me.
I’m in a hurry, I must be off—”
</p>

<p>
“We all know where <i>you</i> must be off to!” said Mrs. Epanchin,
in a meaning voice.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, yes—I must hurry away, I’m late! Look here, dears, let
him write you something in your albums; you’ve no idea what a wonderful
caligraphist he is, wonderful talent! He has just written out ‘Abbot
Pafnute signed this’ for me. Well, <i>au revoir!</i>”
</p>

<p>
“Stop a minute; where are you off to? Who is this abbot?” cried
Mrs. Epanchin to her retreating husband in a tone of excited annoyance.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, my dear, it was an old abbot of that name—I must be off to
see the count, he’s waiting for me, I’m late—Good-bye! <i>Au
revoir</i>, prince!”—and the general bolted at full speed.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, yes—I know what count you’re going to see!”
remarked his wife in a cutting manner, as she turned her angry eyes on the
prince. “Now then, what’s all this about?—What
abbot—Who’s Pafnute?” she added, brusquely.
</p>

<p>
“Mamma!” said Alexandra, shocked at her rudeness.
</p>

<p>
Aglaya stamped her foot.
</p>

<p>
“Nonsense! Let me alone!” said the angry mother. “Now then,
prince, sit down here, no, nearer, come nearer the light! I want to have a good
look at you. So, now then, who is this abbot?”
</p>

<p>
“Abbot Pafnute,” said our friend, seriously and with deference.
</p>

<p>
“Pafnute, yes. And who was he?”
</p>

<p>
Mrs. Epanchin put these questions hastily and brusquely, and when the prince
answered she nodded her head sagely at each word he said.
</p>

<p>
“The Abbot Pafnute lived in the fourteenth century,” began the
prince; “he was in charge of one of the monasteries on the Volga, about
where our present Kostroma government lies. He went to Oreol and helped in the
great matters then going on in the religious world; he signed an edict there,
and I have seen a print of his signature; it struck me, so I copied it. When
the general asked me, in his study, to write something for him, to show my
handwriting, I wrote ‘The Abbot Pafnute signed this,’ in the exact
handwriting of the abbot. The general liked it very much, and that’s why
he recalled it just now.”
</p>

<p>
“Aglaya, make a note of ‘Pafnute,’ or we shall forget him.
H’m! and where is this signature?”
</p>

<p>
“I think it was left on the general’s table.”
</p>

<p>
“Let it be sent for at once!”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, I’ll write you a new one in half a minute,” said the
prince, “if you like!”
</p>

<p>
“Of course, mamma!” said Alexandra. “But let’s have
lunch now, we are all hungry!”
</p>

<p>
“Yes; come along, prince,” said the mother, “are you very
hungry?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes; I must say that I am pretty hungry, thanks very much.”
</p>

<p>
“H’m! I like to see that you know your manners; and you are by no
means such a person as the general thought fit to describe you. Come along; you
sit here, opposite to me,” she continued, “I wish to be able to see
your face. Alexandra, Adelaida, look after the prince! He doesn’t seem so
very ill, does he? I don’t think he requires a napkin under his chin,
after all; are you accustomed to having one on, prince?”
</p>

<p>
“Formerly, when I was seven years old or so. I believe I wore one; but
now I usually hold my napkin on my knee when I eat.”
</p>

<p>
“Of course, of course! And about your fits?”
</p>

<p>
“Fits?” asked the prince, slightly surprised. “I very seldom
have fits nowadays. I don’t know how it may be here, though; they say the
climate may be bad for me.”
</p>

<p>
“He talks very well, you know!” said Mrs. Epanchin, who still
continued to nod at each word the prince spoke. “I really did not expect
it at all; in fact, I suppose it was all stuff and nonsense on the
general’s part, as usual. Eat away, prince, and tell me where you were
born, and where you were brought up. I wish to know all about you, you interest
me very much!”
</p>

<p>
The prince expressed his thanks once more, and eating heartily the while,
recommenced the narrative of his life in Switzerland, all of which we have
heard before. Mrs. Epanchin became more and more pleased with her guest; the
girls, too, listened with considerable attention. In talking over the question
of relationship it turned out that the prince was very well up in the matter
and knew his pedigree off by heart. It was found that scarcely any connection
existed between himself and Mrs. Epanchin, but the talk, and the opportunity of
conversing about her family tree, gratified the latter exceedingly, and she
rose from the table in great good humour.
</p>

<p>
“Let’s all go to my boudoir,” she said, “and they shall
bring some coffee in there. That’s the room where we all assemble and
busy ourselves as we like best,” she explained. “Alexandra, my
eldest, here, plays the piano, or reads or sews; Adelaida paints landscapes and
portraits (but never finishes any); and Aglaya sits and does nothing. I
don’t work too much, either. Here we are, now; sit down, prince, near the
fire and talk to us. I want to hear you relate something. I wish to make sure
of you first and then tell my old friend, Princess Bielokonski, about you. I
wish you to know all the good people and to interest them. Now then,
begin!”
</p>

<p>
“Mamma, it’s rather a strange order, that!” said Adelaida,
who was fussing among her paints and paint-brushes at the easel. Aglaya and
Alexandra had settled themselves with folded hands on a sofa, evidently meaning
to be listeners. The prince felt that the general attention was concentrated
upon himself.
</p>

<p>
“I should refuse to say a word if <i>I</i> were ordered to tell a story
like that!” observed Aglaya.
</p>

<p>
“Why? what’s there strange about it? He has a tongue. Why
shouldn’t he tell us something? I want to judge whether he is a good
story-teller; anything you like, prince—how you liked Switzerland, what
was your first impression, anything. You’ll see, he’ll begin
directly and tell us all about it beautifully.”
</p>

<p>
“The impression was forcible—” the prince began.
</p>

<p>
“There, you see, girls,” said the impatient lady, “he
<i>has</i> begun, you see.”
</p>

<p>
“Well, then, <i>let</i> him talk, mamma,” said Alexandra.
“This prince is a great humbug and by no means an idiot,” she
whispered to Aglaya.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, I saw that at once,” replied the latter. “I don’t
think it at all nice of him to play a part. What does he wish to gain by it, I
wonder?”
</p>

<p>
“My first impression was a very strong one,” repeated the prince.
“When they took me away from Russia, I remember I passed through many
German towns and looked out of the windows, but did not trouble so much as to
ask questions about them. This was after a long series of fits. I always used
to fall into a sort of torpid condition after such a series, and lost my memory
almost entirely; and though I was not altogether without reason at such times,
yet I had no logical power of thought. This would continue for three or four
days, and then I would recover myself again. I remember my melancholy was
intolerable; I felt inclined to cry; I sat and wondered and wondered
uncomfortably; the consciousness that everything was strange weighed terribly
upon me; I could understand that it was all foreign and strange. I recollect I
awoke from this state for the first time at Basle, one evening; the bray of a
donkey aroused me, a donkey in the town market. I saw the donkey and was
extremely pleased with it, and from that moment my head seemed to clear.”
</p>

<p>
“A donkey? How strange! Yet it is not strange. Anyone of us might fall in
love with a donkey! It happened in mythological times,” said Madame
Epanchin, looking wrathfully at her daughters, who had begun to laugh.
“Go on, prince.”
</p>

<p>
“Since that evening I have been specially fond of donkeys. I began to ask
questions about them, for I had never seen one before; and I at once came to
the conclusion that this must be one of the most useful of
animals—strong, willing, patient, cheap; and, thanks to this donkey, I
began to like the whole country I was travelling through; and my melancholy
passed away.”
</p>

<p>
“All this is very strange and interesting,” said Mrs. Epanchin.
“Now let’s leave the donkey and go on to other matters. What are
you laughing at, Aglaya? and you too, Adelaida? The prince told us his
experiences very cleverly; he saw the donkey himself, and what have you ever
seen? <i>You</i> have never been abroad.”
</p>

<p>
“I have seen a donkey though, mamma!” said Aglaya.
</p>

<p>
“And I’ve heard one!” said Adelaida. All three of the girls
laughed out loud, and the prince laughed with them.
</p>

<p>
“Well, it’s too bad of you,” said mamma. “You must
forgive them, prince; they are good girls. I am very fond of them, though I
often have to be scolding them; they are all as silly and mad as march
hares.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, why shouldn’t they laugh?” said the prince. “I
shouldn’t have let the chance go by in their place, I know. But I stick
up for the donkey, all the same; he’s a patient, good-natured
fellow.”
</p>

<p>
“Are you a patient man, prince? I ask out of curiosity,” said Mrs.
Epanchin.
</p>

<p>
All laughed again.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, that wretched donkey again, I see!” cried the lady. “I
assure you, prince, I was not guilty of the least—”
</p>

<p>
“Insinuation? Oh! I assure you, I take your word for it.” And the
prince continued laughing merrily.
</p>

<p>
“I must say it’s very nice of you to laugh. I see you really are a
kind-hearted fellow,” said Mrs. Epanchin.
</p>

<p>
“I’m not always kind, though.”
</p>

<p>
“I am kind myself, and <i>always</i> kind too, if you please!” she
retorted, unexpectedly; “and that is my chief fault, for one ought not to
be always kind. I am often angry with these girls and their father; but the
worst of it is, I am always kindest when I am cross. I was very angry just
before you came, and Aglaya there read me a lesson—thanks, Aglaya,
dear—come and kiss me—there—that’s enough” she
added, as Aglaya came forward and kissed her lips and then her hand. “Now
then, go on, prince. Perhaps you can think of something more exciting than
about the donkey, eh?”
</p>

<p>
“I must say, again, <i>I</i> can’t understand how you can expect
anyone to tell you stories straight away, so,” said Adelaida. “I
know I never could!”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, but the prince can, because he is clever—cleverer than you
are by ten or twenty times, if you like. There, that’s so, prince; and
seriously, let’s drop the donkey now—what else did you see abroad,
besides the donkey?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, but the prince told us about the donkey very cleverly, all the
same,” said Alexandra. “I have always been most interested to hear
how people go mad and get well again, and that sort of thing. Especially when
it happens suddenly.”
</p>

<p>
“Quite so, quite so!” cried Mrs. Epanchin, delighted. “I see
you <i>can</i> be sensible now and then, Alexandra. You were speaking of
Switzerland, prince?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes. We came to Lucerne, and I was taken out in a boat. I felt how
lovely it was, but the loveliness weighed upon me somehow or other, and made me
feel melancholy.”
</p>

<p>
“Why?” asked Alexandra.
</p>

<p>
“I don’t know; I always feel like that when I look at the beauties
of nature for the first time; but then, I was ill at that time, of
course!”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, but I should like to see it!” said Adelaida; “and I
don’t know <i>when</i> we shall ever go abroad. I’ve been two years
looking out for a good subject for a picture. I’ve done all I know.
‘The North and South I know by heart,’ as our poet observes. Do
help me to a subject, prince.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, but I know nothing about painting. It seems to me one only has to
look, and paint what one sees.”
</p>

<p>
“But I don’t know <i>how</i> to see!”
</p>

<p>
“Nonsense, what rubbish you talk!” the mother struck in. “Not
know how to see! Open your eyes and look! If you can’t see here, you
won’t see abroad either. Tell us what you saw yourself, prince!”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, that’s better,” said Adelaida; “the prince
<i>learned to see</i> abroad.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, I hardly know! You see, I only went to restore my health. I
don’t know whether I learned to see, exactly. I was very happy, however,
nearly all the time.”
</p>

<p>
“Happy! you can be happy?” cried Aglaya. “Then how can you
say you did not learn to see? I should think you could teach <i>us</i> to
see!”
</p>

<p>
“Oh! <i>do</i> teach us,” laughed Adelaida.
</p>

<p>
“Oh! I can’t do that,” said the prince, laughing too.
“I lived almost all the while in one little Swiss village; what can I
teach you? At first I was only just not absolutely dull; then my health began
to improve—then every day became dearer and more precious to me, and the
longer I stayed, the dearer became the time to me; so much so that I could not
help observing it; but why this was so, it would be difficult to say.”
</p>

<p>
“So that you didn’t care to go away anywhere else?”
</p>

<p>
“Well, at first I did; I was restless; I didn’t know however I
should manage to support life—you know there are such moments, especially
in solitude. There was a waterfall near us, such a lovely thin streak of water,
like a thread but white and moving. It fell from a great height, but it looked
quite low, and it was half a mile away, though it did not seem fifty paces. I
loved to listen to it at night, but it was then that I became so restless.
Sometimes I went and climbed the mountain and stood there in the midst of the
tall pines, all alone in the terrible silence, with our little village in the
distance, and the sky so blue, and the sun so bright, and an old ruined castle
on the mountain-side, far away. I used to watch the line where earth and sky
met, and longed to go and seek there the key of all mysteries, thinking that I
might find there a new life, perhaps some great city where life should be
grander and richer—and then it struck me that life may be grand enough
even in a prison.”
</p>

<p>
“I read that last most praiseworthy thought in my manual, when I was
twelve years old,” said Aglaya.
</p>

<p>
“All this is pure philosophy,” said Adelaida. “You are a
philosopher, prince, and have come here to instruct us in your views.”
</p>

<p>
“Perhaps you are right,” said the prince, smiling. “I think I
am a philosopher, perhaps, and who knows, perhaps I do wish to teach my views
of things to those I meet with?”
</p>

<p>
“Your philosophy is rather like that of an old woman we know, who is rich
and yet does nothing but try how little she can spend. She talks of nothing but
money all day. Your great philosophical idea of a grand life in a prison and
your four happy years in that Swiss village are like this, rather,” said
Aglaya.
</p>

<p>
“As to life in a prison, of course there may be two opinions,” said
the prince. “I once heard the story of a man who lived twelve years in a
prison—I heard it from the man himself. He was one of the persons under
treatment with my professor; he had fits, and attacks of melancholy, then he
would weep, and once he tried to commit suicide. <i>His</i> life in prison was
sad enough; his only acquaintances were spiders and a tree that grew outside
his grating—but I think I had better tell you of another man I met last
year. There was a very strange feature in this case, strange because of its
extremely rare occurrence. This man had once been brought to the scaffold in
company with several others, and had had the sentence of death by shooting
passed upon him for some political crime. Twenty minutes later he had been
reprieved and some other punishment substituted; but the interval between the
two sentences, twenty minutes, or at least a quarter of an hour, had been
passed in the certainty that within a few minutes he must die. I was very
anxious to hear him speak of his impressions during that dreadful time, and I
several times inquired of him as to what he thought and felt. He remembered
everything with the most accurate and extraordinary distinctness, and declared
that he would never forget a single iota of the experience.
</p>

<p>
“About twenty paces from the scaffold, where he had stood to hear the
sentence, were three posts, fixed in the ground, to which to fasten the
criminals (of whom there were several). The first three criminals were taken to
the posts, dressed in long white tunics, with white caps drawn over their
faces, so that they could not see the rifles pointed at them. Then a group of
soldiers took their stand opposite to each post. My friend was the eighth on
the list, and therefore he would have been among the third lot to go up. A
priest went about among them with a cross: and there was about five minutes of
time left for him to live.
</p>

<p>
“He said that those five minutes seemed to him to be a most interminable
period, an enormous wealth of time; he seemed to be living, in these minutes,
so many lives that there was no need as yet to think of that last moment, so
that he made several arrangements, dividing up the time into portions—one
for saying farewell to his companions, two minutes for that; then a couple more
for thinking over his own life and career and all about himself; and another
minute for a last look around. He remembered having divided his time like this
quite well. While saying good-bye to his friends he recollected asking one of
them some very usual everyday question, and being much interested in the
answer. Then having bade farewell, he embarked upon those two minutes which he
had allotted to looking into himself; he knew beforehand what he was going to
think about. He wished to put it to himself as quickly and clearly as possible,
that here was he, a living, thinking man, and that in three minutes he would be
nobody; or if somebody or something, then what and where? He thought he would
decide this question once for all in these last three minutes. A little way off
there stood a church, and its gilded spire glittered in the sun. He remembered
staring stubbornly at this spire, and at the rays of light sparkling from it.
He could not tear his eyes from these rays of light; he got the idea that these
rays were his new nature, and that in three minutes he would become one of
them, amalgamated somehow with them.
</p>

<p>
“The repugnance to what must ensue almost immediately, and the
uncertainty, were dreadful, he said; but worst of all was the idea, ‘What
should I do if I were not to die now? What if I were to return to life again?
What an eternity of days, and all mine! How I should grudge and count up every
minute of it, so as to waste not a single instant!’ He said that this
thought weighed so upon him and became such a terrible burden upon his brain
that he could not bear it, and wished they would shoot him quickly and have
done with it.”
</p>

<p>
The prince paused and all waited, expecting him to go on again and finish the
story.
</p>

<p>
“Is that all?” asked Aglaya.
</p>

<p>
“All? Yes,” said the prince, emerging from a momentary reverie.
</p>

<p>
“And why did you tell us this?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, I happened to recall it, that’s all! It fitted into the
conversation—”
</p>

<p>
“You probably wish to deduce, prince,” said Alexandra, “that
moments of time cannot be reckoned by money value, and that sometimes five
minutes are worth priceless treasures. All this is very praiseworthy; but may I
ask about this friend of yours, who told you the terrible experience of his
life? He was reprieved, you say; in other words, they did restore to him that
‘eternity of days.’ What did he do with these riches of time? Did
he keep careful account of his minutes?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh no, he didn’t! I asked him myself. He said that he had not
lived a bit as he had intended, and had wasted many, and many a minute.”
</p>

<p>
“Very well, then there’s an experiment, and the thing is proved;
one cannot live and count each moment; say what you like, but one
<i>cannot</i>.”
</p>

<p>
“That is true,” said the prince, “I have thought so myself.
And yet, why shouldn’t one do it?”
</p>

<p>
“You think, then, that you could live more wisely than other
people?” said Aglaya.
</p>

<p>
“I have had that idea.”
</p>

<p>
“And you have it still?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes—I have it still,” the prince replied.
</p>

<p>
He had contemplated Aglaya until now, with a pleasant though rather timid
smile, but as the last words fell from his lips he began to laugh, and looked
at her merrily.
</p>

<p>
“You are not very modest!” said she.
</p>

<p>
“But how brave you are!” said he. “You are laughing, and
I—that man’s tale impressed me so much, that I dreamt of it
afterwards; yes, I dreamt of those five minutes...”
</p>

<p>
He looked at his listeners again with that same serious, searching expression.
</p>

<p>
“You are not angry with me?” he asked suddenly, and with a kind of
nervous hurry, although he looked them straight in the face.
</p>

<p>
“Why should we be angry?” they cried.
</p>

<p>
“Only because I seem to be giving you a lecture, all the time!”
</p>

<p>
At this they laughed heartily.
</p>

<p>
“Please don’t be angry with me,” continued the prince.
“I know very well that I have seen less of life than other people, and
have less knowledge of it. I must appear to speak strangely sometimes...”
</p>

<p>
He said the last words nervously.
</p>

<p>
“You say you have been happy, and that proves you have lived, not less,
but more than other people. Why make all these excuses?” interrupted
Aglaya in a mocking tone of voice. “Besides, you need not mind about
lecturing us; you have nothing to boast of. With your quietism, one could live
happily for a hundred years at least. One might show you the execution of a
felon, or show you one’s little finger. You could draw a moral from
either, and be quite satisfied. That sort of existence is easy enough.”
</p>

<p>
“I can’t understand why you always fly into a temper,” said
Mrs. Epanchin, who had been listening to the conversation and examining the
faces of the speakers in turn. “I do not understand what you mean. What
has your little finger to do with it? The prince talks well, though he is not
amusing. He began all right, but now he seems sad.”
</p>

<p>
“Never mind, mamma! Prince, I wish you had seen an execution,” said
Aglaya. “I should like to ask you a question about that, if you
had.”
</p>

<p>
“I have seen an execution,” said the prince.
</p>

<p>
“You have!” cried Aglaya. “I might have guessed it.
That’s a fitting crown to the rest of the story. If you have seen an
execution, how can you say you lived happily all the while?”
</p>

<p>
“But is there capital punishment where you were?” asked Adelaida.
</p>

<p>
“I saw it at Lyons. Schneider took us there, and as soon as we arrived we
came in for that.”
</p>

<p>
“Well, and did you like it very much? Was it very edifying and
instructive?” asked Aglaya.
</p>

<p>
“No, I didn’t like it at all, and was ill after seeing it; but I
confess I stared as though my eyes were fixed to the sight. I could not tear
them away.”
</p>

<p>
“I, too, should have been unable to tear my eyes away,” said
Aglaya.
</p>

<p>
“They do not at all approve of women going to see an execution there. The
women who do go are condemned for it afterwards in the newspapers.”
</p>

<p>
“That is, by contending that it is not a sight for women they admit that
it is a sight for men. I congratulate them on the deduction. I suppose you
quite agree with them, prince?”
</p>

<p>
“Tell us about the execution,” put in Adelaida.
</p>

<p>
“I would much rather not, just now,” said the prince, a little
disturbed and frowning slightly.
</p>

<p>
“You don’t seem to want to tell us,” said Aglaya, with a
mocking air.
</p>

<p>
“No,—the thing is, I was telling all about the execution a little
while ago, and—”
</p>

<p>
“Whom did you tell about it?”
</p>

<p>
“The man-servant, while I was waiting to see the general.”
</p>

<p>
“Our man-servant?” exclaimed several voices at once.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, the one who waits in the entrance hall, a greyish, red-faced
man—”
</p>

<p>
“The prince is clearly a democrat,” remarked Aglaya.
</p>

<p>
“Well, if you could tell Aleksey about it, surely you can tell us
too.”
</p>

<p>
“I do so want to hear about it,” repeated Adelaida.
</p>

<p>
“Just now, I confess,” began the prince, with more animation,
“when you asked me for a subject for a picture, I confess I had serious
thoughts of giving you one. I thought of asking you to draw the face of a
criminal, one minute before the fall of the guillotine, while the wretched man
is still standing on the scaffold, preparatory to placing his neck on the
block.”
</p>

<p>
“What, his face? only his face?” asked Adelaida. “That would
be a strange subject indeed. And what sort of a picture would that make?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, why not?” the prince insisted, with some warmth. “When I
was in Basle I saw a picture very much in that style—I should like to
tell you about it; I will some time or other; it struck me very
forcibly.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, you shall tell us about the Basle picture another time; now we must
have all about the execution,” said Adelaida. “Tell us about that
face as it appeared to your imagination—how should it be
drawn?—just the face alone, do you mean?”
</p>

<p>
“It was just a minute before the execution,” began the prince,
readily, carried away by the recollection and evidently forgetting everything
else in a moment; “just at the instant when he stepped off the ladder on
to the scaffold. He happened to look in my direction: I saw his eyes and
understood all, at once—but how am I to describe it? I do so wish you or
somebody else could draw it, you, if possible. I thought at the time what a
picture it would make. You must imagine all that went before, of course,
all—all. He had lived in the prison for some time and had not expected
that the execution would take place for at least a week yet—he had
counted on all the formalities and so on taking time; but it so happened that
his papers had been got ready quickly. At five o’clock in the morning he
was asleep—it was October, and at five in the morning it was cold and
dark. The governor of the prison comes in on tip-toe and touches the sleeping
man’s shoulder gently. He starts up. ‘What is it?’ he says.
‘The execution is fixed for ten o’clock.’ He was only just
awake, and would not believe at first, but began to argue that his papers would
not be out for a week, and so on. When he was wide awake and realized the
truth, he became very silent and argued no more—so they say; but after a
bit he said: ‘It comes very hard on one so suddenly’ and then he
was silent again and said nothing.
</p>

<p>
“The three or four hours went by, of course, in necessary
preparations—the priest, breakfast, (coffee, meat, and some wine they
gave him; doesn’t it seem ridiculous?) And yet I believe these people
give them a good breakfast out of pure kindness of heart, and believe that they
are doing a good action. Then he is dressed, and then begins the procession
through the town to the scaffold. I think he, too, must feel that he has an age
to live still while they cart him along. Probably he thought, on the way,
‘Oh, I have a long, long time yet. Three streets of life yet! When
we’ve passed this street there’ll be that other one; and then that
one where the baker’s shop is on the right; and when shall we get there?
It’s ages, ages!’ Around him are crowds shouting, yelling—ten
thousand faces, twenty thousand eyes. All this has to be endured, and
especially the thought: ‘Here are ten thousand men, and not one of them
is going to be executed, and yet I am to die.’ Well, all that is
preparatory.
</p>

<p>
“At the scaffold there is a ladder, and just there he burst into
tears—and this was a strong man, and a terribly wicked one, they say!
There was a priest with him the whole time, talking; even in the cart as they
drove along, he talked and talked. Probably the other heard nothing; he would
begin to listen now and then, and at the third word or so he had forgotten all
about it.
</p>

<p>
“At last he began to mount the steps; his legs were tied, so that he had
to take very small steps. The priest, who seemed to be a wise man, had stopped
talking now, and only held the cross for the wretched fellow to kiss. At the
foot of the ladder he had been pale enough; but when he set foot on the
scaffold at the top, his face suddenly became the colour of paper, positively
like white notepaper. His legs must have become suddenly feeble and helpless,
and he felt a choking in his throat—you know the sudden feeling one has
in moments of terrible fear, when one does not lose one’s wits, but is
absolutely powerless to move? If some dreadful thing were suddenly to happen;
if a house were just about to fall on one;—don’t you know how one
would long to sit down and shut one’s eyes and wait, and wait? Well, when
this terrible feeling came over him, the priest quickly pressed the cross to
his lips, without a word—a little silver cross it was—and he kept
on pressing it to the man’s lips every second. And whenever the cross
touched his lips, the eyes would open for a moment, and the legs moved once,
and he kissed the cross greedily, hurriedly—just as though he were
anxious to catch hold of something in case of its being useful to him
afterwards, though he could hardly have had any connected religious thoughts at
the time. And so up to the very block.
</p>

<p>
“How strange that criminals seldom swoon at such a moment! On the
contrary, the brain is especially active, and works incessantly—probably
hard, hard, hard—like an engine at full pressure. I imagine that various
thoughts must beat loud and fast through his head—all unfinished ones,
and strange, funny thoughts, very likely!—like this, for instance:
‘That man is looking at me, and he has a wart on his forehead! and the
executioner has burst one of his buttons, and the lowest one is all
rusty!’ And meanwhile he notices and remembers everything. There is one
point that cannot be forgotten, round which everything else dances and turns
about; and because of this point he cannot faint, and this lasts until the very
final quarter of a second, when the wretched neck is on the block and the
victim listens and waits and <i>knows</i>—that’s the point, he
<i>knows</i> that he is just <i>now</i> about to die, and listens for the rasp
of the iron over his head. If I lay there, I should certainly listen for that
grating sound, and hear it, too! There would probably be but the tenth part of
an instant left to hear it in, but one would certainly hear it. And imagine,
some people declare that when the head flies off it is <i>conscious</i> of
having flown off! Just imagine what a thing to realize! Fancy if consciousness
were to last for even five seconds!
</p>

<p>
“Draw the scaffold so that only the top step of the ladder comes in
clearly. The criminal must be just stepping on to it, his face as white as
note-paper. The priest is holding the cross to his blue lips, and the criminal
kisses it, and knows and sees and understands everything. The cross and the
head—there’s your picture; the priest and the executioner, with his
two assistants, and a few heads and eyes below. Those might come in as
subordinate accessories—a sort of mist. There’s a picture for
you.” The prince paused, and looked around.
</p>

<p>
“Certainly that isn’t much like quietism,” murmured
Alexandra, half to herself.
</p>

<p>
“Now tell us about your love affairs,” said Adelaida, after a
moment’s pause.
</p>

<p>
The prince gazed at her in amazement.
</p>

<p>
“You know,” Adelaida continued, “you owe us a description of
the Basle picture; but first I wish to hear how you fell in love. Don’t
deny the fact, for you did, of course. Besides, you stop philosophizing when
you are telling about anything.”
</p>

<p>
“Why are you ashamed of your stories the moment after you have told
them?” asked Aglaya, suddenly.
</p>

<p>
“How silly you are!” said Mrs. Epanchin, looking indignantly
towards the last speaker.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, that wasn’t a clever remark,” said Alexandra.
</p>

<p>
“Don’t listen to her, prince,” said Mrs. Epanchin; “she
says that sort of thing out of mischief. Don’t think anything of their
nonsense, it means nothing. They love to chaff, but they like you. I can see it
in their faces—I know their faces.”
</p>

<p>
“I know their faces, too,” said the prince, with a peculiar stress
on the words.
</p>

<p>
“How so?” asked Adelaida, with curiosity.
</p>

<p>
“What do <i>you</i> know about our faces?” exclaimed the other two,
in chorus.
</p>

<p>
But the prince was silent and serious. All awaited his reply.
</p>

<p>
“I’ll tell you afterwards,” he said quietly.
</p>

<p>
“Ah, you want to arouse our curiosity!” said Aglaya. “And how
terribly solemn you are about it!”
</p>

<p>
“Very well,” interrupted Adelaida, “then if you can read
faces so well, you <i>must</i> have been in love. Come now; I’ve
guessed—let’s have the secret!”
</p>

<p>
“I have not been in love,” said the prince, as quietly and
seriously as before. “I have been happy in another way.”
</p>

<p>
“How, how?”
</p>

<p>
“Well, I’ll tell you,” said the prince, apparently in a deep
reverie.
</p>

<h3>VI.</h3>

<p>
“Here you all are,” began the prince, “settling yourselves
down to listen to me with so much curiosity, that if I do not satisfy you you
will probably be angry with me. No, no! I’m only joking!” he added,
hastily, with a smile.
</p>

<p>
“Well, then—they were all children there, and I was always among
children and only with children. They were the children of the village in which
I lived, and they went to the school there—all of them. I did not teach
them, oh no; there was a master for that, one Jules Thibaut. I may have taught
them some things, but I was among them just as an outsider, and I passed all
four years of my life there among them. I wished for nothing better; I used to
tell them everything and hid nothing from them. Their fathers and relations
were very angry with me, because the children could do nothing without me at
last, and used to throng after me at all times. The schoolmaster was my
greatest enemy in the end! I had many enemies, and all because of the children.
Even Schneider reproached me. What were they afraid of? One can tell a child
everything, anything. I have often been struck by the fact that parents know
their children so little. They should not conceal so much from them. How well
even little children understand that their parents conceal things from them,
because they consider them too young to understand! Children are capable of
giving advice in the most important matters. How can one deceive these dear
little birds, when they look at one so sweetly and confidingly? I call them
birds because there is nothing in the world better than birds!
</p>

<p>
“However, most of the people were angry with me about one and the same
thing; but Thibaut simply was jealous of me. At first he had wagged his head
and wondered how it was that the children understood what I told them so well,
and could not learn from him; and he laughed like anything when I replied that
neither he nor I could teach them very much, but that <i>they</i> might teach
us a good deal.
</p>

<p>
“How he could hate me and tell scandalous stories about me, living among
children as he did, is what I cannot understand. Children soothe and heal the
wounded heart. I remember there was one poor fellow at our professor’s
who was being treated for madness, and you have no idea what those children did
for him, eventually. I don’t think he was mad, but only terribly unhappy.
But I’ll tell you all about him another day. Now I must get on with this
story.
</p>

<p>
“The children did not love me at first; I was such a sickly, awkward kind
of a fellow then—and I know I am ugly. Besides, I was a foreigner. The
children used to laugh at me, at first; and they even went so far as to throw
stones at me, when they saw me kiss Marie. I only kissed her once in my
life—no, no, don’t laugh!” The prince hastened to suppress
the smiles of his audience at this point. “It was not a matter of
<i>love</i> at all! If only you knew what a miserable creature she was, you
would have pitied her, just as I did. She belonged to our village. Her mother
was an old, old woman, and they used to sell string and thread, and soap and
tobacco, out of the window of their little house, and lived on the pittance
they gained by this trade. The old woman was ill and very old, and could hardly
move. Marie was her daughter, a girl of twenty, weak and thin and consumptive;
but still she did heavy work at the houses around, day by day. Well, one fine
day a commercial traveller betrayed her and carried her off; and a week later
he deserted her. She came home dirty, draggled, and shoeless; she had walked
for a whole week without shoes; she had slept in the fields, and caught a
terrible cold; her feet were swollen and sore, and her hands torn and scratched
all over. She never had been pretty even before; but her eyes were quiet,
innocent, kind eyes.
</p>

<p>
“She was very quiet always—and I remember once, when she had
suddenly begun singing at her work, everyone said, ‘Marie tried to sing
today!’ and she got so chaffed that she was silent for ever after. She
had been treated kindly in the place before; but when she came back
now—ill and shunned and miserable—not one of them all had the
slightest sympathy for her. Cruel people! Oh, what hazy understandings they
have on such matters! Her mother was the first to show the way. She received
her wrathfully, unkindly, and with contempt. ‘You have disgraced
me,’ she said. She was the first to cast her into ignominy; but when they
all heard that Marie had returned to the village, they ran out to see her and
crowded into the little cottage—old men, children, women,
girls—such a hurrying, stamping, greedy crowd. Marie was lying on the
floor at the old woman’s feet, hungry, torn, draggled, crying, miserable.
</p>

<p>
“When everyone crowded into the room she hid her face in her dishevelled
hair and lay cowering on the floor. Everyone looked at her as though she were a
piece of dirt off the road. The old men scolded and condemned, and the young
ones laughed at her. The women condemned her too, and looked at her
contemptuously, just as though she were some loathsome insect.
</p>

<p>
“Her mother allowed all this to go on, and nodded her head and encouraged
them. The old woman was very ill at that time, and knew she was dying (she
really did die a couple of months later), and though she felt the end
approaching she never thought of forgiving her daughter, to the very day of her
death. She would not even speak to her. She made her sleep on straw in a shed,
and hardly gave her food enough to support life.
</p>

<p>
“Marie was very gentle to her mother, and nursed her, and did everything
for her; but the old woman accepted all her services without a word and never
showed her the slightest kindness. Marie bore all this; and I could see when I
got to know her that she thought it quite right and fitting, considering
herself the lowest and meanest of creatures.
</p>

<p>
“When the old woman took to her bed finally, the other old women in the
village sat with her by turns, as the custom is there; and then Marie was quite
driven out of the house. They gave her no food at all, and she could not get
any work in the village; none would employ her. The men seemed to consider her
no longer a woman, they said such dreadful things to her. Sometimes on Sundays,
if they were drunk enough, they used to throw her a penny or two, into the mud,
and Marie would silently pick up the money. She had began to spit blood at that
time.
</p>

<p>
“At last her rags became so tattered and torn that she was ashamed of
appearing in the village any longer. The children used to pelt her with mud; so
she begged to be taken on as assistant cowherd, but the cowherd would not have
her. Then she took to helping him without leave; and he saw how valuable her
assistance was to him, and did not drive her away again; on the contrary, he
occasionally gave her the remnants of his dinner, bread and cheese. He
considered that he was being very kind. When the mother died, the village
parson was not ashamed to hold Marie up to public derision and shame. Marie was
standing at the coffin’s head, in all her rags, crying.
</p>

<p>
“A crowd of people had collected to see how she would cry. The parson, a
young fellow ambitious of becoming a great preacher, began his sermon and
pointed to Marie. ‘There,’ he said, ‘there is the cause of
the death of this venerable woman’—(which was a lie, because she
had been ill for at least two years)—‘there she stands before you,
and dares not lift her eyes from the ground, because she knows that the finger
of God is upon her. Look at her tatters and rags—the badge of those who
lose their virtue. Who is she? her daughter!’ and so on to the end.
</p>

<p>
“And just fancy, this infamy pleased them, all of them, nearly. Only the
children had altered—for then they were all on my side and had learned to
love Marie.
</p>

<p>
“This is how it was: I had wished to do something for Marie; I longed to
give her some money, but I never had a farthing while I was there. But I had a
little diamond pin, and this I sold to a travelling pedlar; he gave me eight
francs for it—it was worth at least forty.
</p>

<p>
“I long sought to meet Marie alone; and at last I did meet her, on the
hillside beyond the village. I gave her the eight francs and asked her to take
care of the money because I could get no more; and then I kissed her and said
that she was not to suppose I kissed her with any evil motives or because I was
in love with her, for that I did so solely out of pity for her, and because
from the first I had not accounted her as guilty so much as unfortunate. I
longed to console and encourage her somehow, and to assure her that she was not
the low, base thing which she and others strove to make out; but I don’t
think she understood me. She stood before me, dreadfully ashamed of herself,
and with downcast eyes; and when I had finished she kissed my hand. I would
have kissed hers, but she drew it away. Just at this moment the whole troop of
children saw us. (I found out afterwards that they had long kept a watch upon
me.) They all began whistling and clapping their hands, and laughing at us.
Marie ran away at once; and when I tried to talk to them, they threw stones at
me. All the village heard of it the same day, and Marie’s position became
worse than ever. The children would not let her pass now in the streets, but
annoyed her and threw dirt at her more than before. They used to run after
her—she racing away with her poor feeble lungs panting and gasping, and
they pelting her and shouting abuse at her.
</p>

<p>
“Once I had to interfere by force; and after that I took to speaking to
them every day and whenever I could. Occasionally they stopped and listened;
but they teased Marie all the same.
</p>

<p>
“I told them how unhappy Marie was, and after a while they stopped their
abuse of her, and let her go by silently. Little by little we got into the way
of conversing together, the children and I. I concealed nothing from them, I
told them all. They listened very attentively and soon began to be sorry for
Marie. At last some of them took to saying ‘Good-morning’ to her,
kindly, when they met her. It is the custom there to salute anyone you meet
with ‘Good-morning’ whether acquainted or not. I can imagine how
astonished Marie was at these first greetings from the children.
</p>

<p>
“Once two little girls got hold of some food and took it to her, and came
back and told me. They said she had burst into tears, and that they loved her
very much now. Very soon after that they all became fond of Marie, and at the
same time they began to develop the greatest affection for myself. They often
came to me and begged me to tell them stories. I think I must have told stories
well, for they did so love to hear them. At last I took to reading up
interesting things on purpose to pass them on to the little ones, and this went
on for all the rest of my time there, three years. Later, when
everyone—even Schneider—was angry with me for hiding nothing from
the children, I pointed out how foolish it was, for they always knew things,
only they learnt them in a way that soiled their minds but not so from me. One
has only to remember one’s own childhood to admit the truth of this. But
nobody was convinced... It was two weeks before her mother died that I had
kissed Marie; and when the clergyman preached that sermon the children were all
on my side.
</p>

<p>
“When I told them what a shame it was of the parson to talk as he had
done, and explained my reason, they were so angry that some of them went and
broke his windows with stones. Of course I stopped them, for that was not
right, but all the village heard of it, and how I caught it for spoiling the
children! Everyone discovered now that the little ones had taken to being fond
of Marie, and their parents were terribly alarmed; but Marie was so happy. The
children were forbidden to meet her; but they used to run out of the village to
the herd and take her food and things; and sometimes just ran off there and
kissed her, and said, ‘<i>Je vous aime, Marie!</i>’ and then
trotted back again. They imagined that I was in love with Marie, and this was
the only point on which I did not undeceive them, for they got such enjoyment
out of it. And what delicacy and tenderness they showed!
</p>

<p>
“In the evening I used to walk to the waterfall. There was a spot there
which was quite closed in and hidden from view by large trees; and to this spot
the children used to come to me. They could not bear that their dear Leon
should love a poor girl without shoes to her feet and dressed all in rags and
tatters. So, would you believe it, they actually clubbed together, somehow, and
bought her shoes and stockings, and some linen, and even a dress! I can’t
understand how they managed it, but they did it, all together. When I asked
them about it they only laughed and shouted, and the little girls clapped their
hands and kissed me. I sometimes went to see Marie secretly, too. She had
become very ill, and could hardly walk. She still went with the herd, but could
not help the herdsman any longer. She used to sit on a stone near, and wait
there almost motionless all day, till the herd went home. Her consumption was
so advanced, and she was so weak, that she used to sit with closed eyes,
breathing heavily. Her face was as thin as a skeleton’s, and sweat used
to stand on her white brow in large drops. I always found her sitting just like
that. I used to come up quietly to look at her; but Marie would hear me, open
her eyes, and tremble violently as she kissed my hands. I did not take my hand
away because it made her happy to have it, and so she would sit and cry
quietly. Sometimes she tried to speak; but it was very difficult to understand
her. She was almost like a madwoman, with excitement and ecstasy, whenever I
came. Occasionally the children came with me; when they did so, they would
stand some way off and keep guard over us, so as to tell me if anybody came
near. This was a great pleasure to them.
</p>

<p>
“When we left her, Marie used to relapse at once into her old condition,
and sit with closed eyes and motionless limbs. One day she could not go out at
all, and remained at home all alone in the empty hut; but the children very
soon became aware of the fact, and nearly all of them visited her that day as
she lay alone and helpless in her miserable bed.
</p>

<p>
“For two days the children looked after her, and then, when the village
people got to know that Marie was really dying, some of the old women came and
took it in turns to sit by her and look after her a bit. I think they began to
be a little sorry for her in the village at last; at all events they did not
interfere with the children any more, on her account.
</p>

<p>
“Marie lay in a state of uncomfortable delirium the whole while; she
coughed dreadfully. The old women would not let the children stay in the room;
but they all collected outside the window each morning, if only for a moment,
and shouted ‘<i>Bon jour, notre bonne Marie!</i>’ and Marie no
sooner caught sight of, or heard them, and she became quite animated at once,
and, in spite of the old women, would try to sit up and nod her head and smile
at them, and thank them. The little ones used to bring her nice things and
sweets to eat, but she could hardly touch anything. Thanks to them, I assure
you, the girl died almost perfectly happy. She almost forgot her misery, and
seemed to accept their love as a sort of symbol of pardon for her offence,
though she never ceased to consider herself a dreadful sinner. They used to
flutter at her window just like little birds, calling out: ‘<i>Nous
t’aimons, Marie!</i>’
</p>

<p>
“She died very soon; I had thought she would live much longer. The day
before her death I went to see her for the last time, just before sunset. I
think she recognized me, for she pressed my hand.
</p>

<p>
“Next morning they came and told me that Marie was dead. The children
could not be restrained now; they went and covered her coffin with flowers, and
put a wreath of lovely blossoms on her head. The pastor did not throw any more
shameful words at the poor dead woman; but there were very few people at the
funeral. However, when it came to carrying the coffin, all the children rushed
up, to carry it themselves. Of course they could not do it alone, but they
insisted on helping, and walked alongside and behind, crying.
</p>

<p>
“They have planted roses all round her grave, and every year they look
after the flowers and make Marie’s resting-place as beautiful as they
can. I was in ill odour after all this with the parents of the children, and
especially with the parson and schoolmaster. Schneider was obliged to promise
that I should not meet them and talk to them; but we conversed from a distance
by signs, and they used to write me sweet little notes. Afterwards I came
closer than ever to those little souls, but even then it was very dear to me,
to have them so fond of me.
</p>

<p>
“Schneider said that I did the children great harm by my pernicious
‘system’; what nonsense that was! And what did he mean by my
system? He said afterwards that he believed I was a child myself—just
before I came away. ‘You have the form and face of an adult’ he
said, ‘but as regards soul, and character, and perhaps even intelligence,
you are a child in the completest sense of the word, and always will be, if you
live to be sixty.’ I laughed very much, for of course that is nonsense.
But it is a fact that I do not care to be among grown-up people and much prefer
the society of children. However kind people may be to me, I never feel quite
at home with them, and am always glad to get back to my little companions. Now
my companions have always been children, not because I was a child myself once,
but because young things attract me. On one of the first days of my stay in
Switzerland, I was strolling about alone and miserable, when I came upon the
children rushing noisily out of school, with their slates and bags, and books,
their games, their laughter and shouts—and my soul went out to them. I
stopped and laughed happily as I watched their little feet moving so quickly.
Girls and boys, laughing and crying; for as they went home many of them found
time to fight and make peace, to weep and play. I forgot my troubles in looking
at them. And then, all those three years, I tried to understand why men should
be for ever tormenting themselves. I lived the life of a child there, and
thought I should never leave the little village; indeed, I was far from
thinking that I should ever return to Russia. But at last I recognized the fact
that Schneider could not keep me any longer. And then something so important
happened, that Schneider himself urged me to depart. I am going to see now if
can get good advice about it. Perhaps my lot in life will be changed; but that
is not the principal thing. The principal thing is the entire change that has
already come over me. I left many things behind me—too many. They have
gone. On the journey I said to myself, ‘I am going into the world of men.
I don’t know much, perhaps, but a new life has begun for me.’ I
made up my mind to be honest, and steadfast in accomplishing my task. Perhaps I
shall meet with troubles and many disappointments, but I have made up my mind
to be polite and sincere to everyone; more cannot be asked of me. People may
consider me a child if they like. I am often called an idiot, and at one time I
certainly was so ill that I was nearly as bad as an idiot; but I am not an
idiot now. How can I possibly be so when I know myself that I am considered
one?
</p>

<p>
“When I received a letter from those dear little souls, while passing
through Berlin, I only then realized how much I loved them. It was very, very
painful, getting that first little letter. How melancholy they had been when
they saw me off! For a month before, they had been talking of my departure and
sorrowing over it; and at the waterfall, of an evening, when we parted for the
night, they would hug me so tight and kiss me so warmly, far more so than
before. And every now and then they would turn up one by one when I was alone,
just to give me a kiss and a hug, to show their love for me. The whole flock
went with me to the station, which was about a mile from the village, and every
now and then one of them would stop to throw his arms round me, and all the
little girls had tears in their voices, though they tried hard not to cry. As
the train steamed out of the station, I saw them all standing on the platform
waving to me and crying ‘Hurrah!’ till they were lost in the
distance.
</p>

<p>
“I assure you, when I came in here just now and saw your kind faces (I
can read faces well) my heart felt light for the first time since that moment
of parting. I think I must be one of those who are born to be in luck, for one
does not often meet with people whom one feels he can love from the first sight
of their faces; and yet, no sooner do I step out of the railway carriage than I
happen upon you!
</p>

<p>
“I know it is more or less a shamefaced thing to speak of one’s
feelings before others; and yet here am I talking like this to you, and am not
a bit ashamed or shy. I am an unsociable sort of fellow and shall very likely
not come to see you again for some time; but don’t think the worse of me
for that. It is not that I do not value your society; and you must never
suppose that I have taken offence at anything.
</p>

<p>
“You asked me about your faces, and what I could read in them; I will
tell you with the greatest pleasure. You, Adelaida Ivanovna, have a very happy
face; it is the most sympathetic of the three. Not to speak of your natural
beauty, one can look at your face and say to one’s self, ‘She has
the face of a kind sister.’ You are simple and merry, but you can see
into another’s heart very quickly. That’s what I read in your face.
</p>

<p>
“You too, Alexandra Ivanovna, have a very lovely face; but I think you
may have some secret sorrow. Your heart is undoubtedly a kind, good one, but
you are not merry. There is a certain suspicion of ‘shadow’ in your
face, like in that of Holbein’s Madonna in Dresden. So much for your
face. Have I guessed right?
</p>

<p>
“As for your face, Lizabetha Prokofievna, I not only think, but am
perfectly <i>sure</i>, that you are an absolute child—in all, in all,
mind, both good and bad—and in spite of your years. Don’t be angry
with me for saying so; you know what my feelings for children are. And do not
suppose that I am so candid out of pure simplicity of soul. Oh dear no, it is
by no means the case! Perhaps I have my own very profound object in
view.”
</p>

<h3>VII.</h3>

<p>
When the prince ceased speaking all were gazing merrily at him—even
Aglaya; but Lizabetha Prokofievna looked the jolliest of all.
</p>

<p>
“Well!” she cried, “we <i>have</i> ‘put him through his
paces,’ with a vengeance! My dears, you imagined, I believe, that you
were about to patronize this young gentleman, like some poor <i>protégé</i>
picked up somewhere, and taken under your magnificent protection. What fools we
were, and what a specially big fool is your father! Well done, prince! I assure
you the general actually asked me to put you through your paces, and examine
you. As to what you said about my face, you are absolutely correct in your
judgment. I am a child, and know it. I knew it long before you said so; you
have expressed my own thoughts. I think your nature and mine must be extremely
alike, and I am very glad of it. We are like two drops of water, only you are a
man and I a woman, and I’ve not been to Switzerland, and that is all the
difference between us.”
</p>

<p>
“Don’t be in a hurry, mother; the prince says that he has some
motive behind his simplicity,” cried Aglaya.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, yes, so he does,” laughed the others.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, don’t you begin bantering him,” said mamma. “He is
probably a good deal cleverer than all three of you girls put together. We
shall see. Only you haven’t told us anything about Aglaya yet, prince;
and Aglaya and I are both waiting to hear.”
</p>

<p>
“I cannot say anything at present. I’ll tell you afterwards.”
</p>

<p>
“Why? Her face is clear enough, isn’t it?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh yes, of course. You are very beautiful, Aglaya Ivanovna, so beautiful
that one is afraid to look at you.”
</p>

<p>
“Is that all? What about her character?” persisted Mrs. Epanchin.
</p>

<p>
“It is difficult to judge when such beauty is concerned. I have not
prepared my judgment. Beauty is a riddle.”
</p>

<p>
“That means that you have set Aglaya a riddle!” said Adelaida.
“Guess it, Aglaya! But she’s pretty, prince, isn’t
she?”
</p>

<p>
“Most wonderfully so,” said the latter, warmly, gazing at Aglaya
with admiration. “Almost as lovely as Nastasia Philipovna, but quite a
different type.”
</p>

<p>
All present exchanged looks of surprise.
</p>

<p>
“As lovely as <i>who?</i>” said Mrs. Epanchin. “As
<i>Nastasia Philipovna?</i> Where have you seen Nastasia Philipovna? What
Nastasia Philipovna?”
</p>

<p>
“Gavrila Ardalionovitch showed the general her portrait just now.”
</p>

<p>
“How so? Did he bring the portrait for my husband?”
</p>

<p>
“Only to show it. Nastasia Philipovna gave it to Gavrila Ardalionovitch
today, and the latter brought it here to show to the general.”
</p>

<p>
“I must see it!” cried Mrs. Epanchin. “Where is the portrait?
If she gave it to him, he must have it; and he is still in the study. He never
leaves before four o’clock on Wednesdays. Send for Gavrila Ardalionovitch
at once. No, I don’t long to see <i>him</i> so much. Look here, dear
prince, <i>be</i> so kind, will you? Just step to the study and fetch this
portrait! Say we want to look at it. Please do this for me, will you?”
</p>

<p>
“He is a nice fellow, but a little too simple,” said Adelaida, as
the prince left the room.
</p>

<p>
“He is, indeed,” said Alexandra; “almost laughably so at
times.”
</p>

<p>
Neither one nor the other seemed to give expression to her full thoughts.
</p>

<p>
“He got out of it very neatly about our faces, though,” said
Aglaya. “He flattered us all round, even mamma.”
</p>

<p>
“Nonsense!” cried the latter. “He did not flatter me. It was
I who found his appreciation flattering. I think you are a great deal more
foolish than he is. He is simple, of course, but also very knowing. Just like
myself.”
</p>

<p>
“How stupid of me to speak of the portrait,” thought the prince as
he entered the study, with a feeling of guilt at his heart, “and yet,
perhaps I was right after all.” He had an idea, unformed as yet, but a
strange idea.
</p>

<p>
Gavrila Ardalionovitch was still sitting in the study, buried in a mass of
papers. He looked as though he did not take his salary from the public company,
whose servant he was, for a sinecure.
</p>

<p>
He grew very wroth and confused when the prince asked for the portrait, and
explained how it came about that he had spoken of it.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, curse it all,” he said; “what on earth must you go
blabbing for? You know nothing about the thing, and yet—idiot!” he
added, muttering the last word to himself in irrepressible rage.
</p>

<p>
“I am very sorry; I was not thinking at the time. I merely said that
Aglaya was almost as beautiful as Nastasia Philipovna.”
</p>

<p>
Gania asked for further details; and the prince once more repeated the
conversation. Gania looked at him with ironical contempt the while.
</p>

<p>
“Nastasia Philipovna,” he began, and there paused; he was clearly
much agitated and annoyed. The prince reminded him of the portrait.
</p>

<p>
“Listen, prince,” said Gania, as though an idea had just struck
him, “I wish to ask you a great favour, and yet I really don’t
know—”
</p>

<p>
He paused again, he was trying to make up his mind to something, and was
turning the matter over. The prince waited quietly. Once more Gania fixed him
with intent and questioning eyes.
</p>

<p>
“Prince,” he began again, “they are rather angry with me, in
there, owing to a circumstance which I need not explain, so that I do not care
to go in at present without an invitation. I particularly wish to speak to
Aglaya, but I have written a few words in case I shall not have the chance of
seeing her” (here the prince observed a small note in his hand),
“and I do not know how to get my communication to her. Don’t you
think you could undertake to give it to her at once, but only to her, mind, and
so that no one else should see you give it? It isn’t much of a secret,
but still—Well, will you do it?”
</p>

<p>
“I don’t quite like it,” replied the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, but it is absolutely necessary for me,” Gania entreated.
“Believe me, if it were not so, I would not ask you; how else am I to get
it to her? It is most important, dreadfully important!”
</p>

<p>
Gania was evidently much alarmed at the idea that the prince would not consent
to take his note, and he looked at him now with an expression of absolute
entreaty.
</p>

<p>
“Well, I will take it then.”
</p>

<p>
“But mind, nobody is to see!” cried the delighted Gania “And
of course I may rely on your word of honour, eh?”
</p>

<p>
“I won’t show it to anyone,” said the prince.
</p>

<p>
“The letter is not sealed—” continued Gania, and paused in
confusion.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, I won’t read it,” said the prince, quite simply.
</p>

<p>
He took up the portrait, and went out of the room.
</p>

<p>
Gania, left alone, clutched his head with his hands.
</p>

<p>
“One word from her,” he said, “one word from her, and I may
yet be free.”
</p>

<p>
He could not settle himself to his papers again, for agitation and excitement,
but began walking up and down the room from corner to corner.
</p>

<p>
The prince walked along, musing. He did not like his commission, and disliked
the idea of Gania sending a note to Aglaya at all; but when he was two rooms
distant from the drawing-room, where they all were, he stopped as though
recalling something; went to the window, nearer the light, and began to examine
the portrait in his hand.
</p>

<p>
He longed to solve the mystery of something in the face of Nastasia Philipovna,
something which had struck him as he looked at the portrait for the first time;
the impression had not left him. It was partly the fact of her marvellous
beauty that struck him, and partly something else. There was a suggestion of
immense pride and disdain in the face almost of hatred, and at the same time
something confiding and very full of simplicity. The contrast aroused a deep
sympathy in his heart as he looked at the lovely face. The blinding loveliness
of it was almost intolerable, this pale thin face with its flaming eyes; it was
a strange beauty.
</p>

<p>
The prince gazed at it for a minute or two, then glanced around him, and
hurriedly raised the portrait to his lips. When, a minute after, he reached the
drawing-room door, his face was quite composed. But just as he reached the door
he met Aglaya coming out alone.
</p>

<p>
“Gavrila Ardalionovitch begged me to give you this,” he said,
handing her the note.
</p>

<p>
Aglaya stopped, took the letter, and gazed strangely into the prince’s
eyes. There was no confusion in her face; a little surprise, perhaps, but that
was all. By her look she seemed merely to challenge the prince to an
explanation as to how he and Gania happened to be connected in this matter. But
her expression was perfectly cool and quiet, and even condescending.
</p>

<p>
So they stood for a moment or two, confronting one another. At length a faint
smile passed over her face, and she passed by him without a word.
</p>

<p>
Mrs. Epanchin examined the portrait of Nastasia Philipovna for some little
while, holding it critically at arm’s length.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, she is pretty,” she said at last, “even very pretty. I
have seen her twice, but only at a distance. So you admire this kind of beauty,
do you?” she asked the prince, suddenly.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I do—this kind.”
</p>

<p>
“Do you mean especially this kind?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, especially this kind.”
</p>

<p>
“Why?”
</p>

<p>
“There is much suffering in this face,” murmured the prince, more
as though talking to himself than answering the question.
</p>

<p>
“I think you are wandering a little, prince,” Mrs. Epanchin
decided, after a lengthened survey of his face; and she tossed the portrait on
to the table, haughtily.
</p>

<p>
Alexandra took it, and Adelaida came up, and both the girls examined the
photograph. Just then Aglaya entered the room.
</p>

<p>
“What a power!” cried Adelaida suddenly, as she earnestly examined
the portrait over her sister’s shoulder.
</p>

<p>
“Whom? What power?” asked her mother, crossly.
</p>

<p>
“Such beauty is real power,” said Adelaida. “With such beauty
as that one might overthrow the world.” She returned to her easel
thoughtfully.
</p>

<p>
Aglaya merely glanced at the portrait—frowned, and put out her underlip;
then went and sat down on the sofa with folded hands. Mrs. Epanchin rang the
bell.
</p>

<p>
“Ask Gavrila Ardalionovitch to step this way,” said she to the man
who answered.
</p>

<p>
“Mamma!” cried Alexandra, significantly.
</p>

<p>
“I shall just say two words to him, that’s all,” said her
mother, silencing all objection by her manner; she was evidently seriously put
out. “You see, prince, it is all secrets with us, just now—all
secrets. It seems to be the etiquette of the house, for some reason or other.
Stupid nonsense, and in a matter which ought to be approached with all candour
and open-heartedness. There is a marriage being talked of, and I don’t
like this marriage—”
</p>

<p>
“Mamma, what are you saying?” said Alexandra again, hurriedly.
</p>

<p>
“Well, what, my dear girl? As if you can possibly like it yourself? The
heart is the great thing, and the rest is all rubbish—though one must
have sense as well. Perhaps sense is really the great thing. Don’t smile
like that, Aglaya. I don’t contradict myself. A fool with a heart and no
brains is just as unhappy as a fool with brains and no heart. I am one and you
are the other, and therefore both of us suffer, both of us are unhappy.”
</p>

<p>
“Why are you so unhappy, mother?” asked Adelaida, who alone of all
the company seemed to have preserved her good temper and spirits up to now.
</p>

<p>
“In the first place, because of my carefully brought-up daughters,”
said Mrs. Epanchin, cuttingly; “and as that is the best reason I can give
you we need not bother about any other at present. Enough of words, now! We
shall see how both of you (I don’t count Aglaya) will manage your
business, and whether you, most revered Alexandra Ivanovna, will be happy with
your fine mate.”
</p>

<p>
“Ah!” she added, as Gania suddenly entered the room,
“here’s another marrying subject. How do you do?” she
continued, in response to Gania’s bow; but she did not invite him to sit
down. “You are going to be married?”
</p>

<p>
“Married? how—what marriage?” murmured Gania, overwhelmed
with confusion.
</p>

<p>
“Are you about to take a wife? I ask,—if you prefer that
expression.”
</p>

<p>
“No, no I—I—no!” said Gania, bringing out his lie with
a tell-tale blush of shame. He glanced keenly at Aglaya, who was sitting some
way off, and dropped his eyes immediately.
</p>

<p>
Aglaya gazed coldly, intently, and composedly at him, without taking her eyes
off his face, and watched his confusion.
</p>

<p>
“No? You say no, do you?” continued the pitiless Mrs. General.
“Very well, I shall remember that you told me this Wednesday morning, in
answer to my question, that you are not going to be married. What day is it,
Wednesday, isn’t it?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I think so!” said Adelaida.
</p>

<p>
“You never know the day of the week; what’s the day of the
month?”
</p>

<p>
“Twenty-seventh!” said Gania.
</p>

<p>
“Twenty-seventh; very well. Good-bye now; you have a good deal to do,
I’m sure, and I must dress and go out. Take your portrait. Give my
respects to your unfortunate mother, Nina Alexandrovna. <i>Au revoir</i>, dear
prince, come in and see us often, do; and I shall tell old Princess Bielokonski
about you. I shall go and see her on purpose. And listen, my dear boy, I feel
sure that God has sent you to Petersburg from Switzerland on purpose for me.
Maybe you will have other things to do, besides, but you are sent chiefly for
my sake, I feel sure of it. God sent you to me! <i>Au revoir!</i> Alexandra,
come with me, my dear.”
</p>

<p>
Mrs. Epanchin left the room.
</p>

<p>
Gania—confused, annoyed, furious—took up his portrait, and turned
to the prince with a nasty smile on his face.
</p>

<p>
“Prince,” he said, “I am just going home. If you have not
changed your mind as to living with us, perhaps you would like to come with me.
You don’t know the address, I believe?”
</p>

<p>
“Wait a minute, prince,” said Aglaya, suddenly rising from her
seat, “do write something in my album first, will you? Father says you
are a most talented caligraphist; I’ll bring you my book in a
minute.” She left the room.
</p>

<p>
“Well, <i>au revoir</i>, prince,” said Adelaida, “I must be
going too.” She pressed the prince’s hand warmly, and gave him a
friendly smile as she left the room. She did not so much as look at Gania.
</p>

<p>
“This is your doing, prince,” said Gania, turning on the latter so
soon as the others were all out of the room. “This is your doing, sir!
<i>You</i> have been telling them that I am going to be married!” He said
this in a hurried whisper, his eyes flashing with rage and his face ablaze.
“You shameless tattler!”
</p>

<p>
“I assure you, you are under a delusion,” said the prince, calmly
and politely. “I did not even know that you were to be married.”
</p>

<p>
“You heard me talking about it, the general and me. You heard me say that
everything was to be settled today at Nastasia Philipovna’s, and you went
and blurted it out here. You lie if you deny it. Who else could have told them?
Devil take it, sir, who could have told them except yourself? Didn’t the
old woman as good as hint as much to me?”
</p>

<p>
“If she hinted to you who told her you must know best, of course; but I
never said a word about it.”
</p>

<p>
“Did you give my note? Is there an answer?” interrupted Gania,
impatiently.
</p>

<p>
But at this moment Aglaya came back, and the prince had no time to reply.
</p>

<p>
“There, prince,” said she, “there’s my album. Now
choose a page and write me something, will you? There’s a pen, a new one;
do you mind a steel one? I have heard that you caligraphists don’t like
steel pens.”
</p>

<p>
Conversing with the prince, Aglaya did not even seem to notice that Gania was
in the room. But while the prince was getting his pen ready, finding a page,
and making his preparations to write, Gania came up to the fireplace where
Aglaya was standing, to the right of the prince, and in trembling, broken
accents said, almost in her ear:
</p>

<p>
“One word, just one word from you, and I’m saved.”
</p>

<p>
The prince turned sharply round and looked at both of them. Gania’s face
was full of real despair; he seemed to have said the words almost unconsciously
and on the impulse of the moment.
</p>

<p>
Aglaya gazed at him for some seconds with precisely the same composure and calm
astonishment as she had shown a little while before, when the prince handed her
the note, and it appeared that this calm surprise and seemingly absolute
incomprehension of what was said to her, were more terribly overwhelming to
Gania than even the most plainly expressed disdain would have been.
</p>

<p>
“What shall I write?” asked the prince.
</p>

<p>
“I’ll dictate to you,” said Aglaya, coming up to the table.
“Now then, are you ready? Write, ‘I never condescend to
bargain!’ Now put your name and the date. Let me see it.”
</p>

<p>
The prince handed her the album.
</p>

<p>
“Capital! How beautifully you have written it! Thanks so much. <i>Au
revoir</i>, prince. Wait a minute,” she added, “I want to give you
something for a keepsake. Come with me this way, will you?”
</p>

<p>
The prince followed her. Arrived at the dining-room, she stopped.
</p>

<p>
“Read this,” she said, handing him Gania’s note.
</p>

<p>
The prince took it from her hand, but gazed at her in bewilderment.
</p>

<p>
“Oh! I <i>know</i> you haven’t read it, and that you could never be
that man’s accomplice. Read it, I wish you to read it.”
</p>

<p>
The letter had evidently been written in a hurry:
</p>

<p class="letter">
“My fate is to be decided today” (it ran), “you know how.
This day I must give my word irrevocably. I have no right to ask your help, and
I dare not allow myself to indulge in any hopes; but once you said just one
word, and that word lighted up the night of my life, and became the beacon of
my days. Say one more such word, and save me from utter ruin. Only tell me,
‘break off the whole thing!’ and I will do so this very day. Oh!
what can it cost you to say just this one word? In doing so you will but be
giving me a sign of your sympathy for me, and of your pity; only this, only
this; nothing more, <i>nothing</i>. I dare not indulge in any hope, because I
am unworthy of it. But if you say but this word, I will take up my cross again
with joy, and return once more to my battle with poverty. I shall meet the
storm and be glad of it; I shall rise up with renewed strength.<br />
    “Send me back then this one word of sympathy, only sympathy, I swear
to you; and oh! do not be angry with the audacity of despair, with the drowning
man who has dared to make this last effort to save himself from perishing
beneath the waters.
</p>

<p class="right">
“G.L.”
</p>

<p>
“This man assures me,” said Aglaya, scornfully, when the prince had
finished reading the letter, “that the words ‘break off
everything’ do not commit me to anything whatever; and himself gives me a
written guarantee to that effect, in this letter. Observe how ingenuously he
underlines certain words, and how crudely he glosses over his hidden thoughts.
He must know that if he ‘broke off everything,’ <i>first</i>, by
himself, and without telling me a word about it or having the slightest hope on
my account, that in that case I should perhaps be able to change my opinion of
him, and even accept his—friendship. He must know that, but his soul is
such a wretched thing. He knows it and cannot make up his mind; he knows it and
yet asks for guarantees. He cannot bring himself to <i>trust</i>, he wants me
to give him hopes of myself before he lets go of his hundred thousand roubles.
As to the ‘former word’ which he declares ‘lighted up the
night of his life,’ he is simply an impudent liar; I merely pitied him
once. But he is audacious and shameless. He immediately began to hope, at that
very moment. I saw it. He has tried to catch me ever since; he is still fishing
for me. Well, enough of this. Take the letter and give it back to him, as soon
as you have left our house; not before, of course.”
</p>

<p>
“And what shall I tell him by way of answer?”
</p>

<p>
“Nothing—of course! That’s the best answer. Is it the case
that you are going to live in his house?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, your father kindly recommended me to him.”
</p>

<p>
“Then look out for him, I warn you! He won’t forgive you easily,
for taking back the letter.”
</p>

<p>
Aglaya pressed the prince’s hand and left the room. Her face was serious
and frowning; she did not even smile as she nodded good-bye to him at the door.
</p>

<p>
“I’ll just get my parcel and we’ll go,” said the prince
to Gania, as he re-entered the drawing-room. Gania stamped his foot with
impatience. His face looked dark and gloomy with rage.
</p>

<p>
At last they left the house behind them, the prince carrying his bundle.
</p>

<p>
“The answer—quick—the answer!” said Gania, the instant
they were outside. “What did she say? Did you give the letter?” The
prince silently held out the note. Gania was struck motionless with amazement.
</p>

<p>
“How, what? my letter?” he cried. “He never delivered it! I
might have guessed it, oh! curse him! Of course she did not understand what I
meant, naturally! Why—why—<i>why</i> didn’t you give her the
note, you—”
</p>

<p>
“Excuse me; I was able to deliver it almost immediately after receiving
your commission, and I gave it, too, just as you asked me to. It has come into
my hands now because Aglaya Ivanovna has just returned it to me.”
</p>

<p>
“How? When?”
</p>

<p>
“As soon as I finished writing in her album for her, and when she asked
me to come out of the room with her (you heard?), we went into the dining-room,
and she gave me your letter to read, and then told me to return it.”
</p>

<p>
“To <i>read?</i>” cried Gania, almost at the top of his voice;
“to <i>read</i>, and you read it?”
</p>

<p>
And again he stood like a log in the middle of the pavement; so amazed that his
mouth remained open after the last word had left it.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I have just read it.”
</p>

<p>
“And she gave it you to read herself—<i>herself?</i>”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, herself; and you may believe me when I tell you that I would not
have read it for anything without her permission.”
</p>

<p>
Gania was silent for a minute or two, as though thinking out some problem.
Suddenly he cried:
</p>

<p>
“It’s impossible, she cannot have given it to you to read! You are
lying. You read it yourself!”
</p>

<p>
“I am telling you the truth,” said the prince in his former
composed tone of voice; “and believe me, I am extremely sorry that the
circumstance should have made such an unpleasant impression upon you!”
</p>

<p>
“But, you wretched man, at least she must have said something? There must
be <i>some</i> answer from her!”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, of course, she did say something!”
</p>

<p>
“Out with it then, damn it! Out with it at once!” and Gania stamped
his foot twice on the pavement.
</p>

<p>
“As soon as I had finished reading it, she told me that you were fishing
for her; that you wished to compromise her so far as to receive some hopes from
her, trusting to which hopes you might break with the prospect of receiving a
hundred thousand roubles. She said that if you had done this without bargaining
with her, if you had broken with the money prospects without trying to force a
guarantee out of her first, she might have been your friend. That’s all,
I think. Oh no, when I asked her what I was to say, as I took the letter, she
replied that ‘no answer is the best answer.’ I think that was it.
Forgive me if I do not use her exact expressions. I tell you the sense as I
understood it myself.”
</p>

<p>
Ungovernable rage and madness took entire possession of Gania, and his fury
burst out without the least attempt at restraint.
</p>

<p>
“Oh! that’s it, is it!” he yelled. “She throws my
letters out of the window, does she! Oh! and she does not condescend to
bargain, while I <i>do</i>, eh? We shall see, we shall see! I shall pay her out
for this.”
</p>

<p>
He twisted himself about with rage, and grew paler and paler; he shook his
fist. So the pair walked along a few steps. Gania did not stand on ceremony
with the prince; he behaved just as though he were alone in his room. He
clearly counted the latter as a nonentity. But suddenly he seemed to have an
idea, and recollected himself.
</p>

<p>
“But how was it?” he asked, “how was it that you (idiot that
you are),” he added to himself, “were so very confidential a couple
of hours after your first meeting with these people? How was that, eh?”
</p>

<p>
Up to this moment jealousy had not been one of his torments; now it suddenly
gnawed at his heart.
</p>

<p>
“That is a thing I cannot undertake to explain,” replied the
prince. Gania looked at him with angry contempt.
</p>

<p>
“Oh! I suppose the present she wished to make to you, when she took you
into the dining-room, was her confidence, eh?”
</p>

<p>
“I suppose that was it; I cannot explain it otherwise.”
</p>

<p>
“But why, <i>why?</i> Devil take it, what did you do in there? Why did
they fancy you? Look here, can’t you remember exactly what you said to
them, from the very beginning? Can’t you remember?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, we talked of a great many things. When first I went in we began to
speak of Switzerland.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, the devil take Switzerland!”
</p>

<p>
“Then about executions.”
</p>

<p>
“Executions?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes—at least about one. Then I told the whole three years’
story of my life, and the history of a poor peasant girl—”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, damn the peasant girl! go on, go on!” said Gania, impatiently.
</p>

<p>
“Then how Schneider told me about my childish nature, and—”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, <i>curse</i> Schneider and his dirty opinions! Go on.”
</p>

<p>
“Then I began to talk about faces, at least about the <i>expressions</i>
of faces, and said that Aglaya Ivanovna was nearly as lovely as Nastasia
Philipovna. It was then I blurted out about the portrait—”
</p>

<p>
“But you didn’t repeat what you heard in the study? You
didn’t repeat that—eh?”
</p>

<p>
“No, I tell you I did <i>not</i>.”
</p>

<p>
“Then how did they—look here! Did Aglaya show my letter to the old
lady?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, there I can give you my fullest assurance that she did <i>not</i>. I
was there all the while—she had no time to do it!”
</p>

<p>
“But perhaps you may not have observed it, oh, you damned idiot,
you!” he shouted, quite beside himself with fury. “You can’t
even describe what went on.”
</p>

<p>
Gania having once descended to abuse, and receiving no check, very soon knew no
bounds or limit to his licence, as is often the way in such cases. His rage so
blinded him that he had not even been able to detect that this
“idiot,” whom he was abusing to such an extent, was very far from
being slow of comprehension, and had a way of taking in an impression, and
afterwards giving it out again, which was very un-idiotic indeed. But something
a little unforeseen now occurred.
</p>

<p>
“I think I ought to tell you, Gavrila Ardalionovitch,” said the
prince, suddenly, “that though I once was so ill that I really was little
better than an idiot, yet now I am almost recovered, and that, therefore, it is
not altogether pleasant to be called an idiot to my face. Of course your anger
is excusable, considering the treatment you have just experienced; but I must
remind you that you have twice abused me rather rudely. I do not like this sort
of thing, and especially so at the first time of meeting a man, and, therefore,
as we happen to be at this moment standing at a crossroad, don’t you
think we had better part, you to the left, homewards, and I to the right, here?
I have twenty-five roubles, and I shall easily find a lodging.”
</p>

<p>
Gania was much confused, and blushed for shame “Do forgive me,
prince!” he cried, suddenly changing his abusive tone for one of great
courtesy. “For Heaven’s sake, forgive me! You see what a miserable
plight I am in, but you hardly know anything of the facts of the case as yet.
If you did, I am sure you would forgive me, at least partially. Of course it
was inexcusable of me, I know, but—”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, dear me, I really do not require such profuse apologies,”
replied the prince, hastily. “I quite understand how unpleasant your
position is, and that is what made you abuse me. So come along to your house,
after all. I shall be delighted—”
</p>

<p>
“I am not going to let him go like this,” thought Gania, glancing
angrily at the prince as they walked along. “The fellow has sucked
everything out of me, and now he takes off his mask—there’s
something more than appears, here we shall see. It shall all be as clear as
water by tonight, everything!”
</p>

<p>
But by this time they had reached Gania’s house.
</p>

<h3>VIII.</h3>

<p>
The flat occupied by Gania and his family was on the third floor of the house.
It was reached by a clean light staircase, and consisted of seven rooms, a nice
enough lodging, and one would have thought a little too good for a clerk on two
thousand roubles a year. But it was designed to accommodate a few lodgers on
board terms, and had been taken a few months since, much to the disgust of
Gania, at the urgent request of his mother and his sister, Varvara
Ardalionovna, who longed to do something to increase the family income a
little, and fixed their hopes upon letting lodgings. Gania frowned upon the
idea. He thought it <i>infra dig</i>, and did not quite like appearing in
society afterwards—that society in which he had been accustomed to pose
up to now as a young man of rather brilliant prospects. All these concessions
and rebuffs of fortune, of late, had wounded his spirit severely, and his
temper had become extremely irritable, his wrath being generally quite out of
proportion to the cause. But if he had made up his mind to put up with this
sort of life for a while, it was only on the plain understanding with his inner
self that he would very soon change it all, and have things as he chose again.
Yet the very means by which he hoped to make this change threatened to involve
him in even greater difficulties than he had had before.
</p>

<p>
The flat was divided by a passage which led straight out of the entrance-hall.
Along one side of this corridor lay the three rooms which were designed for the
accommodation of the “highly recommended” lodgers. Besides these
three rooms there was another small one at the end of the passage, close to the
kitchen, which was allotted to General Ivolgin, the nominal master of the
house, who slept on a wide sofa, and was obliged to pass into and out of his
room through the kitchen, and up or down the back stairs. Colia, Gania’s
young brother, a school-boy of thirteen, shared this room with his father. He,
too, had to sleep on an old sofa, a narrow, uncomfortable thing with a torn rug
over it; his chief duty being to look after his father, who needed to be
watched more and more every day.
</p>

<p>
The prince was given the middle room of the three, the first being occupied by
one Ferdishenko, while the third was empty.
</p>

<p>
But Gania first conducted the prince to the family apartments. These consisted
of a “salon,” which became the dining-room when required; a
drawing-room, which was only a drawing-room in the morning, and became
Gania’s study in the evening, and his bedroom at night; and lastly Nina
Alexandrovna’s and Varvara’s bedroom, a small, close chamber which
they shared together.
</p>

<p>
In a word, the whole place was confined, and a “tight fit” for the
party. Gania used to grind his teeth with rage over the state of affairs;
though he was anxious to be dutiful and polite to his mother. However, it was
very soon apparent to anyone coming into the house, that Gania was the tyrant
of the family.
</p>

<p>
Nina Alexandrovna and her daughter were both seated in the drawing-room,
engaged in knitting, and talking to a visitor, Ivan Petrovitch Ptitsin.
</p>

<p>
The lady of the house appeared to be a woman of about fifty years of age,
thin-faced, and with black lines under the eyes. She looked ill and rather sad;
but her face was a pleasant one for all that; and from the first word that fell
from her lips, any stranger would at once conclude that she was of a serious
and particularly sincere nature. In spite of her sorrowful expression, she gave
the idea of possessing considerable firmness and decision.
</p>

<p>
Her dress was modest and simple to a degree, dark and elderly in style; but
both her face and appearance gave evidence that she had seen better days.
</p>

<p>
Varvara was a girl of some twenty-three summers, of middle height, thin, but
possessing a face which, without being actually beautiful, had the rare quality
of charm, and might fascinate even to the extent of passionate regard.
</p>

<p>
She was very like her mother: she even dressed like her, which proved that she
had no taste for smart clothes. The expression of her grey eyes was merry and
gentle, when it was not, as lately, too full of thought and anxiety. The same
decision and firmness was to be observed in her face as in her mother’s,
but her strength seemed to be more vigorous than that of Nina Alexandrovna. She
was subject to outbursts of temper, of which even her brother was a little
afraid.
</p>

<p>
The present visitor, Ptitsin, was also afraid of her. This was a young fellow
of something under thirty, dressed plainly, but neatly. His manners were good,
but rather ponderously so. His dark beard bore evidence to the fact that he was
not in any government employ. He could speak well, but preferred silence. On
the whole he made a decidedly agreeable impression. He was clearly attracted by
Varvara, and made no secret of his feelings. She trusted him in a friendly way,
but had not shown him any decided encouragement as yet, which fact did not
quell his ardour in the least.
</p>

<p>
Nina Alexandrovna was very fond of him, and had grown quite confidential with
him of late. Ptitsin, as was well known, was engaged in the business of lending
out money on good security, and at a good rate of interest. He was a great
friend of Gania’s.
</p>

<p>
After a formal introduction by Gania (who greeted his mother very shortly, took
no notice of his sister, and immediately marched Ptitsin out of the room), Nina
Alexandrovna addressed a few kind words to the prince and forthwith requested
Colia, who had just appeared at the door, to show him to the “middle
room.”
</p>

<p>
Colia was a nice-looking boy. His expression was simple and confiding, and his
manners were very polite and engaging.
</p>

<p>
“Where’s your luggage?” he asked, as he led the prince away
to his room.
</p>

<p>
“I had a bundle; it’s in the entrance hall.”
</p>

<p>
“I’ll bring it you directly. We only have a cook and one maid, so I
have to help as much as I can. Varia looks after things, generally, and loses
her temper over it. Gania says you have only just arrived from
Switzerland?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes.”
</p>

<p>
“Is it jolly there?”
</p>

<p>
“Very.”
</p>

<p>
“Mountains?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes.”
</p>

<p>
“I’ll go and get your bundle.”
</p>

<p>
Here Varvara joined them.
</p>

<p>
“The maid shall bring your bed-linen directly. Have you a
portmanteau?”
</p>

<p>
“No; a bundle—your brother has just gone to the hall for it.”
</p>

<p>
“There’s nothing there except this,” said Colia, returning at
this moment. “Where did you put it?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh! but that’s all I have,” said the prince, taking it.
</p>

<p>
“Ah! I thought perhaps Ferdishenko had taken it.”
</p>

<p>
“Don’t talk nonsense,” said Varia, severely. She seemed put
out, and was only just polite with the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Oho!” laughed the boy, “you can be nicer than that to
<i>me</i>, you know—I’m not Ptitsin!”
</p>

<p>
“You ought to be whipped, Colia, you silly boy. If you want
anything” (to the prince) “please apply to the servant. We dine at
half-past four. You can take your dinner with us, or have it in your room, just
as you please. Come along, Colia, don’t disturb the prince.”
</p>

<p>
At the door they met Gania coming in.
</p>

<p>
“Is father in?” he asked. Colia whispered something in his ear and
went out.
</p>

<p>
“Just a couple of words, prince, if you’ll excuse me. Don’t
blab over <i>there</i> about what you may see here, or in this house as to all
that about Aglaya and me, you know. Things are not altogether pleasant in this
establishment—devil take it all! You’ll see. At all events keep
your tongue to yourself for <i>today</i>.”
</p>

<p>
“I assure you I ‘blabbed’ a great deal less than you seem to
suppose,” said the prince, with some annoyance. Clearly the relations
between Gania and himself were by no means improving.
</p>

<p>
“Oh well; I caught it quite hot enough today, thanks to you. However, I
forgive you.”
</p>

<p>
“I think you might fairly remember that I was not in any way bound, I had
no reason to be silent about that portrait. You never asked me not to mention
it.”
</p>

<p>
“Pfu! what a wretched room this is—dark, and the window looking
into the yard. Your coming to our house is, in no respect, opportune. However,
it’s not <i>my</i> affair. I don’t keep the lodgings.”
</p>

<p>
Ptitsin here looked in and beckoned to Gania, who hastily left the room, in
spite of the fact that he had evidently wished to say something more and had
only made the remark about the room to gain time. The prince had hardly had
time to wash and tidy himself a little when the door opened once more, and
another figure appeared.
</p>

<p>
This was a gentleman of about thirty, tall, broad-shouldered, and red-haired;
his face was red, too, and he possessed a pair of thick lips, a wide nose,
small eyes, rather bloodshot, and with an ironical expression in them; as
though he were perpetually winking at someone. His whole appearance gave one
the idea of impudence; his dress was shabby.
</p>

<p>
He opened the door just enough to let his head in. His head remained so placed
for a few seconds while he quietly scrutinized the room; the door then opened
enough to admit his body; but still he did not enter. He stood on the threshold
and examined the prince carefully. At last he gave the door a final shove,
entered, approached the prince, took his hand and seated himself and the owner
of the room on two chairs side by side.
</p>

<p>
“Ferdishenko,” he said, gazing intently and inquiringly into the
prince’s eyes.
</p>

<p>
“Very well, what next?” said the latter, almost laughing in his
face.
</p>

<p>
“A lodger here,” continued the other, staring as before.
</p>

<p>
“Do you wish to make acquaintance?” asked the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Ah!” said the visitor, passing his fingers through his hair and
sighing. He then looked over to the other side of the room and around it.
“Got any money?” he asked, suddenly.
</p>

<p>
“Not much.”
</p>

<p>
“How much?”
</p>

<p>
“Twenty-five roubles.”
</p>

<p>
“Let’s see it.”
</p>

<p>
The prince took his banknote out and showed it to Ferdishenko. The latter
unfolded it and looked at it; then he turned it round and examined the other
side; then he held it up to the light.
</p>

<p>
“How strange that it should have browned so,” he said,
reflectively. “These twenty-five rouble notes brown in a most
extraordinary way, while other notes often grow paler. Take it.”
</p>

<p>
The prince took his note. Ferdishenko rose.
</p>

<p>
“I came here to warn you,” he said. “In the first place,
don’t lend me any money, for I shall certainly ask you to.”
</p>

<p>
“Very well.”
</p>

<p>
“Shall you pay here?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I intend to.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh! I <i>don’t</i> intend to. Thanks. I live here, next door to
you; you noticed a room, did you? Don’t come to me very often; I shall
see you here quite often enough. Have you seen the general?”
</p>

<p>
“No.”
</p>

<p>
“Nor heard him?”
</p>

<p>
“No; of course not.”
</p>

<p>
“Well, you’ll both hear and see him soon; he even tries to borrow
money from me. <i>Avis au lecteur.</i> Good-bye; do you think a man can
possibly live with a name like Ferdishenko?”
</p>

<p>
“Why not?”
</p>

<p>
“Good-bye.”
</p>

<p>
And so he departed. The prince found out afterwards that this gentleman made it
his business to amaze people with his originality and wit, but that it did not
as a rule “come off.” He even produced a bad impression on some
people, which grieved him sorely; but he did not change his ways for all that.
</p>

<p>
As he went out of the prince’s room, he collided with yet another visitor
coming in. Ferdishenko took the opportunity of making several warning gestures
to the prince from behind the new arrival’s back, and left the room in
conscious pride.
</p>

<p>
This next arrival was a tall red-faced man of about fifty-five, with greyish
hair and whiskers, and large eyes which stood out of their sockets. His
appearance would have been distinguished had it not been that he gave the idea
of being rather dirty. He was dressed in an old coat, and he smelled of vodka
when he came near. His walk was effective, and he clearly did his best to
appear dignified, and to impress people by his manner.
</p>

<p>
This gentleman now approached the prince slowly, and with a most courteous
smile; silently took his hand and held it in his own, as he examined the
prince’s features as though searching for familiar traits therein.
</p>

<p>
“‘Tis he, ‘tis he!” he said at last, quietly, but with
much solemnity. “As though he were alive once more. I heard the familiar
name—the dear familiar name—and, oh! how it reminded me of the
irrevocable past—Prince Muishkin, I believe?”
</p>

<p>
“Exactly so.”
</p>

<p>
“General Ivolgin—retired and unfortunate. May I ask your Christian
and generic names?”
</p>

<p>
“Lef Nicolaievitch.”
</p>

<p>
“So, so—the son of my old, I may say my childhood’s friend,
Nicolai Petrovitch.”
</p>

<p>
“My father’s name was Nicolai Lvovitch.”
</p>

<p>
“Lvovitch,” repeated the general without the slightest haste, and
with perfect confidence, just as though he had not committed himself the least
in the world, but merely made a little slip of the tongue. He sat down, and
taking the prince’s hand, drew him to a seat next to himself.
</p>

<p>
“I carried you in my arms as a baby,” he observed.
</p>

<p>
“Really?” asked the prince. “Why, it’s twenty years
since my father died.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, yes—twenty years and three months. We were educated together;
I went straight into the army, and he—”
</p>

<p>
“My father went into the army, too. He was a sub-lieutenant in the
Vasiliefsky regiment.”
</p>

<p>
“No, sir—in the Bielomirsky; he changed into the latter shortly
before his death. I was at his bedside when he died, and gave him my blessing
for eternity. Your mother—” The general paused, as though overcome
with emotion.
</p>

<p>
“She died a few months later, from a cold,” said the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, not cold—believe an old man—not from a cold, but from
grief for her prince. Oh—your mother, your mother! heigh-ho!
Youth—youth! Your father and I—old friends as we were—nearly
murdered each other for her sake.”
</p>

<p>
The prince began to be a little incredulous.
</p>

<p>
“I was passionately in love with her when she was engaged—engaged
to my friend. The prince noticed the fact and was furious. He came and woke me
at seven o’clock one morning. I rise and dress in amazement; silence on
both sides. I understand it all. He takes a couple of pistols out of his
pocket—across a handkerchief—without witnesses. Why invite
witnesses when both of us would be walking in eternity in a couple of minutes?
The pistols are loaded; we stretch the handkerchief and stand opposite one
another. We aim the pistols at each other’s hearts. Suddenly tears start
to our eyes, our hands shake; we weep, we embrace—the battle is one of
self-sacrifice now! The prince shouts, ‘She is yours;’ I cry,
‘She is yours—’ in a word, in a word—You’ve come
to live with us, hey?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes—yes—for a while, I think,” stammered the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Prince, mother begs you to come to her,” said Colia, appearing at
the door.
</p>

<p>
The prince rose to go, but the general once more laid his hand in a friendly
manner on his shoulder, and dragged him down on to the sofa.
</p>

<p>
“As the true friend of your father, I wish to say a few words to
you,” he began. “I have suffered—there was a catastrophe. I
suffered without a trial; I had no trial. Nina Alexandrovna my wife, is an
excellent woman, so is my daughter Varvara. We have to let lodgings because we
are poor—a dreadful, unheard-of come-down for us—for me, who should
have been a governor-general; but we are very glad to have <i>you</i>, at all
events. Meanwhile there is a tragedy in the house.”
</p>

<p>
The prince looked inquiringly at the other.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, a marriage is being arranged—a marriage between a
questionable woman and a young fellow who might be a flunkey. They wish to
bring this woman into the house where my wife and daughter reside, but while I
live and breathe she shall never enter my doors. I shall lie at the threshold,
and she shall trample me underfoot if she does. I hardly talk to Gania now, and
avoid him as much as I can. I warn you of this beforehand, but you cannot fail
to observe it. But you are the son of my old friend, and I hope—”
</p>

<p>
“Prince, be so kind as to come to me for a moment in the
drawing-room,” said Nina Alexandrovna herself, appearing at the door.
</p>

<p>
“Imagine, my dear,” cried the general, “it turns out that I
have nursed the prince on my knee in the old days.” His wife looked
searchingly at him, and glanced at the prince, but said nothing. The prince
rose and followed her; but hardly had they reached the drawing-room, and Nina
Alexandrovna had begun to talk hurriedly, when in came the general. She
immediately relapsed into silence. The master of the house may have observed
this, but at all events he did not take any notice of it; he was in high good
humour.
</p>

<p>
“A son of my old friend, dear,” he cried; “surely you must
remember Prince Nicolai Lvovitch? You saw him at—at Tver.”
</p>

<p>
“I don’t remember any Nicolai Lvovitch. Was that your
father?” she inquired of the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, but he died at Elizabethgrad, not at Tver,” said the prince,
rather timidly. “So Pavlicheff told me.”
</p>

<p>
“No, Tver,” insisted the general; “he removed just before his
death. You were very small and cannot remember; and Pavlicheff, though an
excellent fellow, may have made a mistake.”
</p>

<p>
“You knew Pavlicheff then?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, yes—a wonderful fellow; but I was present myself. I gave him
my blessing.”
</p>

<p>
“My father was just about to be tried when he died,” said the
prince, “although I never knew of what he was accused. He died in
hospital.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh! it was the Kolpakoff business, and of course he would have been
acquitted.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes? Do you know that for a fact?” asked the prince, whose
curiosity was aroused by the general’s words.
</p>

<p>
“I should think so indeed!” cried the latter. “The
court-martial came to no decision. It was a mysterious, an impossible business,
one might say! Captain Larionoff, commander of the company, had died; his
command was handed over to the prince for the moment. Very well. This soldier,
Kolpakoff, stole some leather from one of his comrades, intending to sell it,
and spent the money on drink. Well! The prince—you understand that what
follows took place in the presence of the sergeant-major, and a
corporal—the prince rated Kolpakoff soundly, and threatened to have him
flogged. Well, Kolpakoff went back to the barracks, lay down on a camp
bedstead, and in a quarter of an hour was dead: you quite understand? It was,
as I said, a strange, almost impossible, affair. In due course Kolpakoff was
buried; the prince wrote his report, the deceased’s name was removed from
the roll. All as it should be, is it not? But exactly three months later at the
inspection of the brigade, the man Kolpakoff was found in the third company of
the second battalion of infantry, Novozemlianski division, just as if nothing
had happened!”
</p>

<p>
“What?” said the prince, much astonished.
</p>

<p>
“It did not occur—it’s a mistake!” said Nina
Alexandrovna quickly, looking, at the prince rather anxiously. “<i>Mon
mari se trompe</i>,” she added, speaking in French.
</p>

<p>
“My dear, ‘<i>se trompe</i>’ is easily said. Do you remember
any case at all like it? Everybody was at their wits’ end. I should be
the first to say ‘<i>qu’on se trompe</i>,’ but unfortunately
I was an eye-witness, and was also on the commission of inquiry. Everything
proved that it was really he, the very same soldier Kolpakoff who had been
given the usual military funeral to the sound of the drum. It is of course a
most curious case—nearly an impossible one. I recognize that...
but—”
</p>

<p>
“Father, your dinner is ready,” said Varvara at this point, putting
her head in at the door.
</p>

<p>
“Very glad, I’m particularly hungry. Yes, yes, a strange
coincidence—almost a psychological—”
</p>

<p>
“Your soup’ll be cold; do come.”
</p>

<p>
“Coming, coming,” said the general. “Son of my old
friend—” he was heard muttering as he went down the passage.
</p>

<p>
“You will have to excuse very much in my husband, if you stay with
us,” said Nina Alexandrovna; “but he will not disturb you often. He
dines alone. Everyone has his little peculiarities, you know, and some people
perhaps have more than those who are most pointed at and laughed at. One thing
I must beg of you—if my husband applies to you for payment for board and
lodging, tell him that you have already paid me. Of course anything paid by you
to the general would be as fully settled as if paid to me, so far as you are
concerned; but I wish it to be so, if you please, for convenience’ sake.
What is it, Varia?”
</p>

<p>
Varia had quietly entered the room, and was holding out the portrait of
Nastasia Philipovna to her mother.
</p>

<p>
Nina Alexandrovna started, and examined the photograph intently, gazing at it
long and sadly. At last she looked up inquiringly at Varia.
</p>

<p>
“It’s a present from herself to him,” said Varia; “the
question is to be finally decided this evening.”
</p>

<p>
“This evening!” repeated her mother in a tone of despair, but
softly, as though to herself. “Then it’s all settled, of course,
and there’s no hope left to us. She has anticipated her answer by the
present of her portrait. Did he show it you himself?” she added, in some
surprise.
</p>

<p>
“You know we have hardly spoken to each other for a whole month. Ptitsin
told me all about it; and the photo was lying under the table, and I picked it
up.”
</p>

<p>
“Prince,” asked Nina Alexandrovna, “I wanted to inquire
whether you have known my son long? I think he said that you had only arrived
today from somewhere.”
</p>

<p>
The prince gave a short narrative of what we have heard before, leaving out the
greater part. The two ladies listened intently.
</p>

<p>
“I did not ask about Gania out of curiosity,” said the elder, at
last. “I wish to know how much you know about him, because he said just
now that we need not stand on ceremony with you. What, exactly, does that
mean?”
</p>

<p>
At this moment Gania and Ptitsin entered the room together, and Nina
Alexandrovna immediately became silent again. The prince remained seated next
to her, but Varia moved to the other end of the room; the portrait of Nastasia
Philipovna remained lying as before on the work-table. Gania observed it there,
and with a frown of annoyance snatched it up and threw it across to his
writing-table, which stood at the other end of the room.
</p>

<p>
“Is it today, Gania?” asked Nina Alexandrovna, at last.
</p>

<p>
“Is what today?” cried the former. Then suddenly recollecting
himself, he turned sharply on the prince. “Oh,” he growled,
“I see, you are here, that explains it! Is it a disease, or what, that
you can’t hold your tongue? Look here, understand once for all,
prince—”
</p>

<p>
“I am to blame in this, Gania—no one else,” said Ptitsin.
</p>

<p>
Gania glanced inquiringly at the speaker.
</p>

<p>
“It’s better so, you know, Gania—especially as, from one
point of view, the matter may be considered as settled,” said Ptitsin;
and sitting down a little way from the table he began to study a paper covered
with pencil writing.
</p>

<p>
Gania stood and frowned, he expected a family scene. He never thought of
apologizing to the prince, however.
</p>

<p>
“If it’s all settled, Gania, then of course Mr. Ptitsin is
right,” said Nina Alexandrovna. “Don’t frown. You need not
worry yourself, Gania; I shall ask you no questions. You need not tell me
anything you don’t like. I assure you I have quite submitted to your
will.” She said all this, knitting away the while as though perfectly
calm and composed.
</p>

<p>
Gania was surprised, but cautiously kept silence and looked at his mother,
hoping that she would express herself more clearly. Nina Alexandrovna observed
his cautiousness and added, with a bitter smile:
</p>

<p>
“You are still suspicious, I see, and do not believe me; but you may be
quite at your ease. There shall be no more tears, nor questions—not from
my side, at all events. All I wish is that you may be happy, you know that. I
have submitted to my fate; but my heart will always be with you, whether we
remain united, or whether we part. Of course I only answer for myself—you
can hardly expect your sister—”
</p>

<p>
“My sister again,” cried Gania, looking at her with contempt and
almost hate. “Look here, mother, I have already given you my word that I
shall always respect you fully and absolutely, and so shall everyone else in
this house, be it who it may, who shall cross this threshold.”
</p>

<p>
Gania was so much relieved that he gazed at his mother almost affectionately.
</p>

<p>
“I was not at all afraid for myself, Gania, as you know well. It was not
for my own sake that I have been so anxious and worried all this time! They say
it is all to be settled to-day. What is to be settled?”
</p>

<p>
“She has promised to tell me tonight at her own house whether she
consents or not,” replied Gania.
</p>

<p>
“We have been silent on this subject for three weeks,” said his
mother, “and it was better so; and now I will only ask you one question.
How can she give her consent and make you a present of her portrait when you do
not love her? How can such a—such a—”
</p>

<p>
“Practised hand—eh?”
</p>

<p>
“I was not going to express myself so. But how could you so blind
her?”
</p>

<p>
Nina Alexandrovna’s question betrayed intense annoyance. Gania waited a
moment and then said, without taking the trouble to conceal the irony of his
tone:
</p>

<p>
“There you are, mother, you are always like that. You begin by promising
that there are to be no reproaches or insinuations or questions, and here you
are beginning them at once. We had better drop the subject—we had,
really. I shall never leave you, mother; any other man would cut and run from
such a sister as this. See how she is looking at me at this moment! Besides,
how do you know that I am blinding Nastasia Philipovna? As for Varia, I
don’t care—she can do just as she pleases. There, that’s
quite enough!”
</p>

<p>
Gania’s irritation increased with every word he uttered, as he walked up
and down the room. These conversations always touched the family sores before
long.
</p>

<p>
“I have said already that the moment she comes in I go out, and I shall
keep my word,” remarked Varia.
</p>

<p>
“Out of obstinacy” shouted Gania. “You haven’t married,
either, thanks to your obstinacy. Oh, you needn’t frown at me, Varvara!
You can go at once for all I care; I am sick enough of your company. What, you
are going to leave us are you, too?” he cried, turning to the prince, who
was rising from his chair.
</p>

<p>
Gania’s voice was full of the most uncontrolled and uncontrollable
irritation.
</p>

<p>
The prince turned at the door to say something, but perceiving in Gania’s
expression that there was but that one drop wanting to make the cup overflow,
he changed his mind and left the room without a word. A few minutes later he
was aware from the noisy voices in the drawing room, that the conversation had
become more quarrelsome than ever after his departure.
</p>

<p>
He crossed the salon and the entrance-hall, so as to pass down the corridor
into his own room. As he came near the front door he heard someone outside
vainly endeavouring to ring the bell, which was evidently broken, and only
shook a little, without emitting any sound.
</p>

<p>
The prince took down the chain and opened the door. He started back in
amazement—for there stood Nastasia Philipovna. He knew her at once from
her photograph. Her eyes blazed with anger as she looked at him. She quickly
pushed by him into the hall, shouldering him out of her way, and said,
furiously, as she threw off her fur cloak:
</p>

<p>
“If you are too lazy to mend your bell, you should at least wait in the
hall to let people in when they rattle the bell handle. There, now,
you’ve dropped my fur cloak—dummy!”
</p>

<p>
Sure enough the cloak was lying on the ground. Nastasia had thrown it off her
towards the prince, expecting him to catch it, but the prince had missed it.
</p>

<p>
“Now then—announce me, quick!”
</p>

<p>
The prince wanted to say something, but was so confused and astonished that he
could not. However, he moved off towards the drawing-room with the cloak over
his arm.
</p>

<p>
“Now then, where are you taking my cloak to? Ha, ha, ha! Are you
mad?”
</p>

<p>
The prince turned and came back, more confused than ever. When she burst out
laughing, he smiled, but his tongue could not form a word as yet. At first,
when he had opened the door and saw her standing before him, he had become as
pale as death; but now the red blood had rushed back to his cheeks in a
torrent.
</p>

<p>
“Why, what an idiot it is!” cried Nastasia, stamping her foot with
irritation. “Go on, do! Whom are you going to announce?”
</p>

<p>
“Nastasia Philipovna,” murmured the prince.
</p>

<p>
“And how do you know that?” she asked him, sharply.
</p>

<p>
“I have never seen you before!”
</p>

<p>
“Go on, announce me—what’s that noise?”
</p>

<p>
“They are quarrelling,” said the prince, and entered the
drawing-room, just as matters in there had almost reached a crisis. Nina
Alexandrovna had forgotten that she had “submitted to everything!”
She was defending Varia. Ptitsin was taking her part, too. Not that Varia was
afraid of standing up for herself. She was by no means that sort of a girl; but
her brother was becoming ruder and more intolerable every moment. Her usual
practice in such cases as the present was to say nothing, but stare at him,
without taking her eyes off his face for an instant. This manoeuvre, as she
well knew, could drive Gania distracted.
</p>

<p>
Just at this moment the door opened and the prince entered, announcing:
</p>

<p>
“Nastasia Philipovna!”
</p>

<h3>IX.</h3>

<p>
Silence immediately fell on the room; all looked at the prince as though they
neither understood, nor hoped to understand. Gania was motionless with horror.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia’s arrival was a most unexpected and overwhelming event to all
parties. In the first place, she had never been before. Up to now she had been
so haughty that she had never even asked Gania to introduce her to his parents.
Of late she had not so much as mentioned them. Gania was partly glad of this;
but still he had put it to her debit in the account to be settled after
marriage.
</p>

<p>
He would have borne anything from her rather than this visit. But one thing
seemed to him quite clear—her visit now, and the present of her portrait
on this particular day, pointed out plainly enough which way she intended to
make her decision!
</p>

<p>
The incredulous amazement with which all regarded the prince did not last long,
for Nastasia herself appeared at the door and passed in, pushing by the prince
again.
</p>

<p>
“At last I’ve stormed the citadel! Why do you tie up your
bell?” she said, merrily, as she pressed Gania’s hand, the latter
having rushed up to her as soon as she made her appearance. “What are you
looking so upset about? Introduce me, please!”
</p>

<p>
The bewildered Gania introduced her first to Varia, and both women, before
shaking hands, exchanged looks of strange import. Nastasia, however, smiled
amiably; but Varia did not try to look amiable, and kept her gloomy expression.
She did not even vouchsafe the usual courteous smile of etiquette. Gania darted
a terrible glance of wrath at her for this, but Nina Alexandrovna mended
matters a little when Gania introduced her at last. Hardly, however, had the
old lady begun about her “highly gratified feelings,” and so on,
when Nastasia left her, and flounced into a chair by Gania’s side in the
corner by the window, and cried: “Where’s your study? and where are
the—the lodgers? You do take in lodgers, don’t you?”
</p>

<p>
Gania looked dreadfully put out, and tried to say something in reply, but
Nastasia interrupted him:
</p>

<p>
“Why, where are you going to squeeze lodgers in here? Don’t you use
a study? Does this sort of thing pay?” she added, turning to Nina
Alexandrovna.
</p>

<p>
“Well, it is troublesome, rather,” said the latter; “but I
suppose it will ‘pay’ pretty well. We have only just begun,
however—”
</p>

<p>
Again Nastasia Philipovna did not hear the sentence out. She glanced at Gania,
and cried, laughing, “What a face! My goodness, what a face you have on
at this moment!”
</p>

<p>
Indeed, Gania did not look in the least like himself. His bewilderment and his
alarmed perplexity passed off, however, and his lips now twitched with rage as
he continued to stare evilly at his laughing guest, while his countenance
became absolutely livid.
</p>

<p>
There was another witness, who, though standing at the door motionless and
bewildered himself, still managed to remark Gania’s death-like pallor,
and the dreadful change that had come over his face. This witness was the
prince, who now advanced in alarm and muttered to Gania:
</p>

<p>
“Drink some water, and don’t look like that!”
</p>

<p>
It was clear that he came out with these words quite spontaneously, on the spur
of the moment. But his speech was productive of much—for it appeared that
all Gania’s rage now overflowed upon the prince. He seized him by the
shoulder and gazed with an intensity of loathing and revenge at him, but said
nothing—as though his feelings were too strong to permit of words.
</p>

<p>
General agitation prevailed. Nina Alexandrovna gave a little cry of anxiety;
Ptitsin took a step forward in alarm; Colia and Ferdishenko stood stock still
at the door in amazement;—only Varia remained coolly watching the scene
from under her eyelashes. She did not sit down, but stood by her mother with
folded hands. However, Gania recollected himself almost immediately. He let go
of the prince and burst out laughing.
</p>

<p>
“Why, are you a doctor, prince, or what?” he asked, as naturally as
possible. “I declare you quite frightened me! Nastasia Philipovna, let me
introduce this interesting character to you—though I have only known him
myself since the morning.”
</p>

<p>
Nastasia gazed at the prince in bewilderment. “Prince? He a Prince? Why,
I took him for the footman, just now, and sent him in to announce me! Ha, ha,
ha, isn’t that good!”
</p>

<p>
“Not bad that, not bad at all!” put in Ferdishenko, “<i>se
non è vero</i>—”
</p>

<p>
“I rather think I pitched into you, too, didn’t I? Forgive
me—do! Who is he, did you say? What prince? Muishkin?” she added,
addressing Gania.
</p>

<p>
“He is a lodger of ours,” explained the latter.
</p>

<p>
“An idiot!”—the prince distinctly heard the word half
whispered from behind him. This was Ferdishenko’s voluntary information
for Nastasia’s benefit.
</p>

<p>
“Tell me, why didn’t you put me right when I made such a dreadful
mistake just now?” continued the latter, examining the prince from head
to foot without the slightest ceremony. She awaited the answer as though
convinced that it would be so foolish that she must inevitably fail to restrain
her laughter over it.
</p>

<p>
“I was astonished, seeing you so suddenly—” murmured the
prince.
</p>

<p>
“How did you know who I was? Where had you seen me before? And why were
you so struck dumb at the sight of me? What was there so overwhelming about
me?”
</p>

<p>
“Oho! ho, ho, ho!” cried Ferdishenko. “<i>Now</i> then,
prince! My word, what things I would say if I had such a chance as that! My
goodness, prince—go on!”
</p>

<p>
“So should I, in your place, I’ve no doubt!” laughed the
prince to Ferdishenko; then continued, addressing Nastasia: “Your
portrait struck me very forcibly this morning; then I was talking about you to
the Epanchins; and then, in the train, before I reached Petersburg, Parfen
Rogojin told me a good deal about you; and at the very moment that I opened the
door to you I happened to be thinking of you, when—there you stood before
me!”
</p>

<p>
“And how did you recognize me?”
</p>

<p>
“From the portrait!”
</p>

<p>
“What else?”
</p>

<p>
“I seemed to imagine you exactly as you are—I seemed to have seen
you somewhere.”
</p>

<p>
“Where—where?”
</p>

<p>
“I seem to have seen your eyes somewhere; but it cannot be! I have not
seen you—I never was here before. I may have dreamed of you, I
don’t know.”
</p>

<p>
The prince said all this with manifest effort—in broken sentences, and
with many drawings of breath. He was evidently much agitated. Nastasia
Philipovna looked at him inquisitively, but did not laugh.
</p>

<p>
“Bravo, prince!” cried Ferdishenko, delighted.
</p>

<p>
At this moment a loud voice from behind the group which hedged in the prince
and Nastasia Philipovna, divided the crowd, as it were, and before them stood
the head of the family, General Ivolgin. He was dressed in evening clothes; his
moustache was dyed.
</p>

<p>
This apparition was too much for Gania. Vain and ambitious almost to
morbidness, he had had much to put up with in the last two months, and was
seeking feverishly for some means of enabling himself to lead a more
presentable kind of existence. At home, he now adopted an attitude of absolute
cynicism, but he could not keep this up before Nastasia Philipovna, although he
had sworn to make her pay after marriage for all he suffered now. He was
experiencing a last humiliation, the bitterest of all, at this moment—the
humiliation of blushing for his own kindred in his own house. A question
flashed through his mind as to whether the game was really worth the candle.
</p>

<p>
For that had happened at this moment, which for two months had been his
nightmare; which had filled his soul with dread and shame—the meeting
between his father and Nastasia Philipovna. He had often tried to imagine such
an event, but had found the picture too mortifying and exasperating, and had
quietly dropped it. Very likely he anticipated far worse things than was at all
necessary; it is often so with vain persons. He had long since determined,
therefore, to get his father out of the way, anywhere, before his marriage, in
order to avoid such a meeting; but when Nastasia entered the room just now, he
had been so overwhelmed with astonishment, that he had not thought of his
father, and had made no arrangements to keep him out of the way. And now it was
too late—there he was, and got up, too, in a dress coat and white tie,
and Nastasia in the very humour to heap ridicule on him and his family circle;
of this last fact, he felt quite persuaded. What else had she come for? There
were his mother and his sister sitting before her, and she seemed to have
forgotten their very existence already; and if she behaved like that, he
thought, she must have some object in view.
</p>

<p>
Ferdishenko led the general up to Nastasia Philipovna.
</p>

<p>
“Ardalion Alexandrovitch Ivolgin,” said the smiling general, with a
low bow of great dignity, “an old soldier, unfortunate, and the father of
this family; but happy in the hope of including in that family so
exquisite—”
</p>

<p>
He did not finish his sentence, for at this moment Ferdishenko pushed a chair
up from behind, and the general, not very firm on his legs, at this
post-prandial hour, flopped into it backwards. It was always a difficult thing
to put this warrior to confusion, and his sudden descent left him as composed
as before. He had sat down just opposite to Nastasia, whose fingers he now
took, and raised to his lips with great elegance, and much courtesy. The
general had once belonged to a very select circle of society, but he had been
turned out of it two or three years since on account of certain weaknesses, in
which he now indulged with all the less restraint; but his good manners
remained with him to this day, in spite of all.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia Philipovna seemed delighted at the appearance of this latest arrival,
of whom she had of course heard a good deal by report.
</p>

<p>
“I have heard that my son—” began Ardalion Alexandrovitch.
</p>

<p>
“Your son, indeed! A nice papa you are! <i>You</i> might have come to see
me anyhow, without compromising anyone. Do you hide yourself, or does your son
hide you?”
</p>

<p>
“The children of the nineteenth century, and their parents—”
began the general, again.
</p>

<p>
“Nastasia Philipovna, will you excuse the general for a moment? Someone
is inquiring for him,” said Nina Alexandrovna in a loud voice,
interrupting the conversation.
</p>

<p>
“Excuse him? Oh no, I have wished to see him too long for that. Why, what
business can he have? He has retired, hasn’t he? You won’t leave
me, general, will you?”
</p>

<p>
“I give you my word that he shall come and see you—but he—he
needs rest just now.”
</p>

<p>
“General, they say you require rest,” said Nastasia Philipovna,
with the melancholy face of a child whose toy is taken away.
</p>

<p>
Ardalion Alexandrovitch immediately did his best to make his foolish position a
great deal worse.
</p>

<p>
“My dear, my dear!” he said, solemnly and reproachfully, looking at
his wife, with one hand on his heart.
</p>

<p>
“Won’t you leave the room, mamma?” asked Varia, aloud.
</p>

<p>
“No, Varia, I shall sit it out to the end.”
</p>

<p>
Nastasia must have overheard both question and reply, but her vivacity was not
in the least damped. On the contrary, it seemed to increase. She immediately
overwhelmed the general once more with questions, and within five minutes that
gentleman was as happy as a king, and holding forth at the top of his voice,
amid the laughter of almost all who heard him.
</p>

<p>
Colia jogged the prince’s arm.
</p>

<p>
“Can’t <i>you</i> get him out of the room, somehow? <i>Do</i>,
please,” and tears of annoyance stood in the boy’s eyes.
“Curse that Gania!” he muttered, between his teeth.
</p>

<p>
“Oh yes, I knew General Epanchin well,” General Ivolgin was saying
at this moment; “he and Prince Nicolai Ivanovitch Muishkin—whose
son I have this day embraced after an absence of twenty years—and I, were
three inseparables. Alas one is in the grave, torn to pieces by calumnies and
bullets; another is now before you, still battling with calumnies and
bullets—”
</p>

<p>
“Bullets?” cried Nastasia.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, here in my chest. I received them at the siege of Kars, and I feel
them in bad weather now. And as to the third of our trio, Epanchin, of course
after that little affair with the poodle in the railway carriage, it was all
<i>up</i> between us.”
</p>

<p>
“Poodle? What was that? And in a railway carriage? Dear me,” said
Nastasia, thoughtfully, as though trying to recall something to mind.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, just a silly, little occurrence, really not worth telling, about
Princess Bielokonski’s governess, Miss Smith, and—oh, it is really
not worth telling!”
</p>

<p>
“No, no, we must have it!” cried Nastasia merrily.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, of course,” said Ferdishenko. “C’est du
nouveau.”
</p>

<p>
“Ardalion,” said Nina Alexandrovitch, entreatingly.
</p>

<p>
“Papa, you are wanted!” cried Colia.
</p>

<p>
“Well, it is a silly little story, in a few words,” began the
delighted general. “A couple of years ago, soon after the new railway was
opened, I had to go somewhere or other on business. Well, I took a first-class
ticket, sat down, and began to smoke, or rather <i>continued</i> to smoke, for
I had lighted up before. I was alone in the carriage. Smoking is not allowed,
but is not prohibited either; it is half allowed—so to speak, winked at.
I had the window open.”
</p>

<p>
“Suddenly, just before the whistle, in came two ladies with a little
poodle, and sat down opposite to me; not bad-looking women; one was in light
blue, the other in black silk. The poodle, a beauty with a silver collar, lay
on light blue’s knee. They looked haughtily about, and talked English
together. I took no notice, just went on smoking. I observed that the ladies
were getting angry—over my cigar, doubtless. One looked at me through her
tortoise-shell eyeglass.
</p>

<p>
“I took no notice, because they never said a word. If they didn’t
like the cigar, why couldn’t they say so? Not a word, not a hint!
Suddenly, and without the very slightest suspicion of warning, ‘light
blue’ seizes my cigar from between my fingers, and, wheugh! out of the
window with it! Well, on flew the train, and I sat bewildered, and the young
woman, tall and fair, and rather red in the face, too red, glared at me with
flashing eyes.
</p>

<p>
“I didn’t say a word, but with extreme courtesy, I may say with
most refined courtesy, I reached my finger and thumb over towards the poodle,
took it up delicately by the nape of the neck, and chucked it out of the
window, after the cigar. The train went flying on, and the poodle’s yells
were lost in the distance.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, you naughty man!” cried Nastasia, laughing and clapping her
hands like a child.
</p>

<p>
“Bravo!” said Ferdishenko. Ptitsin laughed too, though he had been
very sorry to see the general appear. Even Colia laughed and said,
“Bravo!”
</p>

<p>
“And I was right, truly right,” cried the general, with warmth and
solemnity, “for if cigars are forbidden in railway carriages, poodles are
much more so.”
</p>

<p>
“Well, and what did the lady do?” asked Nastasia, impatiently.
</p>

<p>
“She—ah, that’s where all the mischief of it lies!”
replied Ivolgin, frowning. “Without a word, as it were, of warning, she
slapped me on the cheek! An extraordinary woman!”
</p>

<p>
“And you?”
</p>

<p>
The general dropped his eyes, and elevated his brows; shrugged his shoulders,
tightened his lips, spread his hands, and remained silent. At last he blurted
out:
</p>

<p>
“I lost my head!”
</p>

<p>
“Did you hit her?”
</p>

<p>
“No, oh no!—there was a great flare-up, but I didn’t hit her!
I had to struggle a little, purely to defend myself; but the very devil was in
the business. It turned out that ‘light blue’ was an Englishwoman,
governess or something, at Princess Bielokonski’s, and the other woman
was one of the old-maid princesses Bielokonski. Well, everybody knows what
great friends the princess and Mrs. Epanchin are, so there was a pretty kettle
of fish. All the Bielokonskis went into mourning for the poodle. Six princesses
in tears, and the Englishwoman shrieking!
</p>

<p>
“Of course I wrote an apology, and called, but they would not receive
either me or my apology, and the Epanchins cut me, too!”
</p>

<p>
“But wait,” said Nastasia. “How is it that, five or six days
since, I read exactly the same story in the paper, as happening between a
Frenchman and an English girl? The cigar was snatched away exactly as you
describe, and the poodle was chucked out of the window after it. The slapping
came off, too, as in your case; and the girl’s dress was light
blue!”
</p>

<p>
The general blushed dreadfully; Colia blushed too; and Ptitsin turned hastily
away. Ferdishenko was the only one who laughed as gaily as before. As to Gania,
I need not say that he was miserable; he stood dumb and wretched and took no
notice of anybody.
</p>

<p>
“I assure you,” said the general, “that exactly the same
thing happened to myself!”
</p>

<p>
“I remembered there was some quarrel between father and Miss Smith, the
Bielokonski’s governess,” said Colia.
</p>

<p>
“How very curious, point for point the same anecdote, and happening at
different ends of Europe! Even the light blue dress the same,” continued
the pitiless Nastasia. “I must really send you the paper.”
</p>

<p>
“You must observe,” insisted the general, “that my experience
was two years earlier.”
</p>

<p>
“Ah! that’s it, no doubt!”
</p>

<p>
Nastasia Philipovna laughed hysterically.
</p>

<p>
“Father, will you hear a word from me outside!” said Gania, his
voice shaking with agitation, as he seized his father by the shoulder. His eyes
shone with a blaze of hatred.
</p>

<p>
At this moment there was a terrific bang at the front door, almost enough to
break it down. Some most unusual visitor must have arrived. Colia ran to open.
</p>

<h3>X.</h3>

<p>
The entrance-hall suddenly became full of noise and people. To judge from the
sounds which penetrated to the drawing-room, a number of people had already
come in, and the stampede continued. Several voices were talking and shouting
at once; others were talking and shouting on the stairs outside; it was
evidently a most extraordinary visit that was about to take place.
</p>

<p>
Everyone exchanged startled glances. Gania rushed out towards the dining-room,
but a number of men had already made their way in, and met him.
</p>

<p>
“Ah! here he is, the Judas!” cried a voice which the prince
recognized at once. “How d’ye do, Gania, you old blackguard?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, that’s the man!” said another voice.
</p>

<p>
There was no room for doubt in the prince’s mind: one of the voices was
Rogojin’s, and the other Lebedeff’s.
</p>

<p>
Gania stood at the door like a block and looked on in silence, putting no
obstacle in the way of their entrance, and ten or a dozen men marched in behind
Parfen Rogojin. They were a decidedly mixed-looking collection, and some of
them came in in their furs and caps. None of them were quite drunk, but all
appeared to be considerably excited.
</p>

<p>
They seemed to need each other’s support, morally, before they dared come
in; not one of them would have entered alone but with the rest each one was
brave enough. Even Rogojin entered rather cautiously at the head of his troop;
but he was evidently preoccupied. He appeared to be gloomy and morose, and had
clearly come with some end in view. All the rest were merely chorus, brought in
to support the chief character. Besides Lebedeff there was the dandy Zalesheff,
who came in without his coat and hat, two or three others followed his example;
the rest were more uncouth. They included a couple of young merchants, a man in
a great-coat, a medical student, a little Pole, a small fat man who laughed
continuously, and an enormously tall stout one who apparently put great faith
in the strength of his fists. A couple of “ladies” of some sort put
their heads in at the front door, but did not dare come any farther. Colia
promptly banged the door in their faces and locked it.
</p>

<p>
“Hallo, Gania, you blackguard! You didn’t expect Rogojin,
eh?” said the latter, entering the drawing-room, and stopping before
Gania.
</p>

<p>
But at this moment he saw, seated before him, Nastasia Philipovna. He had not
dreamed of meeting her here, evidently, for her appearance produced a
marvellous effect upon him. He grew pale, and his lips became actually blue.
</p>

<p>
“I suppose it is true, then!” he muttered to himself, and his face
took on an expression of despair. “So that’s the end of it! Now
you, sir, will you answer me or not?” he went on suddenly, gazing at
Gania with ineffable malice. “Now then, you—”
</p>

<p>
He panted, and could hardly speak for agitation. He advanced into the room
mechanically; but perceiving Nina Alexandrovna and Varia he became more or less
embarrassed, in spite of his excitement. His followers entered after him, and
all paused a moment at sight of the ladies. Of course their modesty was not
fated to be long-lived, but for a moment they were abashed. Once let them begin
to shout, however, and nothing on earth should disconcert them.
</p>

<p>
“What, you here too, prince?” said Rogojin, absently, but a little
surprised all the same “Still in your gaiters, eh?” He sighed, and
forgot the prince next moment, and his wild eyes wandered over to Nastasia
again, as though attracted in that direction by some magnetic force.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia looked at the new arrivals with great curiosity. Gania recollected
himself at last.
</p>

<p>
“Excuse me, sirs,” he said, loudly, “but what does all this
mean?” He glared at the advancing crowd generally, but addressed his
remarks especially to their captain, Rogojin. “You are not in a stable,
gentlemen, though you may think it—my mother and sister are
present.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, I see your mother and sister,” muttered Rogojin, through his
teeth; and Lebedeff seemed to feel himself called upon to second the statement.
</p>

<p>
“At all events, I must request you to step into the salon,” said
Gania, his rage rising quite out of proportion to his words, “and then I
shall inquire—”
</p>

<p>
“What, he doesn’t know me!” said Rogojin, showing his teeth
disagreeably. “He doesn’t recognize Rogojin!” He did not move
an inch, however.
</p>

<p>
“I have met you somewhere, I believe, but—”
</p>

<p>
“Met me somewhere, pfu! Why, it’s only three months since I lost
two hundred roubles of my father’s money to you, at cards. The old fellow
died before he found out. Ptitsin knows all about it. Why, I’ve only to
pull out a three-rouble note and show it to you, and you’d crawl on your
hands and knees to the other end of the town for it; that’s the sort of
man you are. Why, I’ve come now, at this moment, to buy you up! Oh, you
needn’t think that because I wear these boots I have no money. I have
lots of money, my beauty,—enough to buy up you and all yours together. So
I shall, if I like to! I’ll buy you up! I will!” he yelled,
apparently growing more and more intoxicated and excited. “Oh, Nastasia
Philipovna! don’t turn me out! Say one word, do! Are you going to marry
this man, or not?”
</p>

<p>
Rogojin asked his question like a lost soul appealing to some divinity, with
the reckless daring of one appointed to die, who has nothing to lose.
</p>

<p>
He awaited the reply in deadly anxiety.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia Philipovna gazed at him with a haughty, ironical expression of face;
but when she glanced at Nina Alexandrovna and Varia, and from them to Gania,
she changed her tone, all of a sudden.
</p>

<p>
“Certainly not; what are you thinking of? What could have induced you to
ask such a question?” she replied, quietly and seriously, and even,
apparently, with some astonishment.
</p>

<p>
“No? No?” shouted Rogojin, almost out of his mind with joy.
“You are not going to, after all? And they told me—oh, Nastasia
Philipovna—they said you had promised to marry him, <i>him!</i> As if you
<i>could</i> do it!—him—pooh! I don’t mind saying it to
everyone—I’d buy him off for a hundred roubles, any day pfu! Give
him a thousand, or three if he likes, poor devil, and he’d cut and run
the day before his wedding, and leave his bride to me! Wouldn’t you,
Gania, you blackguard? You’d take three thousand, wouldn’t you?
Here’s the money! Look, I’ve come on purpose to pay you off and get
your receipt, formally. I said I’d buy you up, and so I will.”
</p>

<p>
“Get out of this, you drunken beast!” cried Gania, who was red and
white by turns.
</p>

<p>
Rogojin’s troop, who were only waiting for an excuse, set up a howl at
this. Lebedeff stepped forward and whispered something in Parfen’s ear.
</p>

<p>
“You’re right, clerk,” said the latter, “you’re
right, tipsy spirit—you’re right!—Nastasia Philipovna,”
he added, looking at her like some lunatic, harmless generally, but suddenly
wound up to a pitch of audacity, “here are eighteen thousand roubles,
and—and you shall have more—.” Here he threw a packet of
bank-notes tied up in white paper, on the table before her, not daring to say
all he wished to say.
</p>

<p>
“No—no—no!” muttered Lebedeff, clutching at his arm. He
was clearly aghast at the largeness of the sum, and thought a far smaller
amount should have been tried first.
</p>

<p>
“No, you fool—you don’t know whom you are dealing
with—and it appears I am a fool, too!” said Parfen, trembling
beneath the flashing glance of Nastasia. “Oh, curse it all! What a fool I
was to listen to you!” he added, with profound melancholy.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia Philipovna, observing his woe-begone expression, suddenly burst out
laughing.
</p>

<p>
“Eighteen thousand roubles, for me? Why, you declare yourself a fool at
once,” she said, with impudent familiarity, as she rose from the sofa and
prepared to go. Gania watched the whole scene with a sinking of the heart.
</p>

<p>
“Forty thousand, then—forty thousand roubles instead of eighteen!
Ptitsin and another have promised to find me forty thousand roubles by seven
o’clock tonight. Forty thousand roubles—paid down on the
nail!”
</p>

<p>
The scene was growing more and more disgraceful; but Nastasia Philipovna
continued to laugh and did not go away. Nina Alexandrovna and Varia had both
risen from their places and were waiting, in silent horror, to see what would
happen. Varia’s eyes were all ablaze with anger; but the scene had a
different effect on Nina Alexandrovna. She paled and trembled, and looked more
and more like fainting every moment.
</p>

<p>
“Very well then, a <i>hundred</i> thousand! a hundred thousand! paid this
very day. Ptitsin! find it for me. A good share shall stick to your
fingers—come!”
</p>

<p>
“You are mad!” said Ptitsin, coming up quickly and seizing him by
the hand. “You’re drunk—the police will be sent for if you
don’t look out. Think where you are.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, he’s boasting like a drunkard,” added Nastasia, as
though with the sole intention of goading him.
</p>

<p>
“I do <i>not</i> boast! You shall have a hundred thousand, this very day.
Ptitsin, get the money, you gay usurer! Take what you like for it, but get it
by the evening! I’ll show that I’m in earnest!” cried
Rogojin, working himself up into a frenzy of excitement.
</p>

<p>
“Come, come; what’s all this?” cried General Ivolgin,
suddenly and angrily, coming close up to Rogojin. The unexpectedness of this
sally on the part of the hitherto silent old man caused some laughter among the
intruders.
</p>

<p>
“Halloa! what’s this now?” laughed Rogojin. “You come
along with me, old fellow! You shall have as much to drink as you like.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, it’s too horrible!” cried poor Colia, sobbing with shame
and annoyance.
</p>

<p>
“Surely there must be someone among all of you here who will turn this
shameless creature out of the room?” cried Varia, suddenly. She was
shaking and trembling with rage.
</p>

<p>
“That’s me, I suppose. I’m the shameless creature!”
cried Nastasia Philipovna, with amused indifference. “Dear me, and I
came—like a fool, as I am—to invite them over to my house for the
evening! Look how your sister treats me, Gavrila Ardalionovitch.”
</p>

<p>
For some moments Gania stood as if stunned or struck by lightning, after his
sister’s speech. But seeing that Nastasia Philipovna was really about to
leave the room this time, he sprang at Varia and seized her by the arm like a
madman.
</p>

<p>
“What have you done?” he hissed, glaring at her as though he would
like to annihilate her on the spot. He was quite beside himself, and could
hardly articulate his words for rage.
</p>

<p>
“What have I done? Where are you dragging me to?”
</p>

<p>
“Do you wish me to beg pardon of this creature because she has come here
to insult our mother and disgrace the whole household, you low, base
wretch?” cried Varia, looking back at her brother with proud defiance.
</p>

<p>
A few moments passed as they stood there face to face, Gania still holding her
wrist tightly. Varia struggled once—twice—to get free; then could
restrain herself no longer, and spat in his face.
</p>

<p>
“There’s a girl for you!” cried Nastasia Philipovna.
“Mr. Ptitsin, I congratulate you on your choice.”
</p>

<p>
Gania lost his head. Forgetful of everything he aimed a blow at Varia, which
would inevitably have laid her low, but suddenly another hand caught his.
Between him and Varia stood the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Enough—enough!” said the latter, with insistence, but all of
a tremble with excitement.
</p>

<p>
“Are you going to cross my path for ever, damn you!” cried Gania;
and, loosening his hold on Varia, he slapped the prince’s face with all
his force.
</p>

<p>
Exclamations of horror arose on all sides. The prince grew pale as death; he
gazed into Gania’s eyes with a strange, wild, reproachful look; his lips
trembled and vainly endeavoured to form some words; then his mouth twisted into
an incongruous smile.
</p>

<p>
“Very well—never mind about me; but I shall not allow you to strike
her!” he said, at last, quietly. Then, suddenly, he could bear it no
longer, and covering his face with his hands, turned to the wall, and murmured
in broken accents:
</p>

<p>
“Oh! how ashamed you will be of this afterwards!”
</p>

<p>
Gania certainly did look dreadfully abashed. Colia rushed up to comfort the
prince, and after him crowded Varia, Rogojin and all, even the general.
</p>

<p>
“It’s nothing, it’s nothing!” said the prince, and
again he wore the smile which was so inconsistent with the circumstances.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, he will be ashamed!” cried Rogojin. “You will be
properly ashamed of yourself for having injured such a—such a
sheep” (he could not find a better word). “Prince, my dear fellow,
leave this and come away with me. I’ll show you how Rogojin shows his
affection for his friends.”
</p>

<p>
Nastasia Philipovna was also much impressed, both with Gania’s action and
with the prince’s reply.
</p>

<p>
Her usually thoughtful, pale face, which all this while had been so little in
harmony with the jests and laughter which she had seemed to put on for the
occasion, was now evidently agitated by new feelings, though she tried to
conceal the fact and to look as though she were as ready as ever for jesting
and irony.
</p>

<p>
“I really think I must have seen him somewhere!” she murmured
seriously enough.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, aren’t you ashamed of yourself—aren’t you ashamed?
Are you really the sort of woman you are trying to represent yourself to be? Is
it possible?” The prince was now addressing Nastasia, in a tone of
reproach, which evidently came from his very heart.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia Philipovna looked surprised, and smiled, but evidently concealed
something beneath her smile and with some confusion and a glance at Gania she
left the room.
</p>

<p>
However, she had not reached the outer hall when she turned round, walked
quickly up to Nina Alexandrovna, seized her hand and lifted it to her lips.
</p>

<p>
“He guessed quite right. I am not that sort of woman,” she
whispered hurriedly, flushing red all over. Then she turned again and left the
room so quickly that no one could imagine what she had come back for. All they
saw was that she said something to Nina Alexandrovna in a hurried whisper, and
seemed to kiss her hand. Varia, however, both saw and heard all, and watched
Nastasia out of the room with an expression of wonder.
</p>

<p>
Gania recollected himself in time to rush after her in order to show her out,
but she had gone. He followed her to the stairs.
</p>

<p>
“Don’t come with me,” she cried, “<i>Au revoir</i>,
till the evening—do you hear? <i>Au revoir!</i>”
</p>

<p>
He returned thoughtful and confused; the riddle lay heavier than ever on his
soul. He was troubled about the prince, too, and so bewildered that he did not
even observe Rogojin’s rowdy band crowd past him and step on his toes, at
the door as they went out. They were all talking at once. Rogojin went ahead of
the others, talking to Ptitsin, and apparently insisting vehemently upon
something very important.
</p>

<p>
“You’ve lost the game, Gania” he cried, as he passed the
latter.
</p>

<p>
Gania gazed after him uneasily, but said nothing.
</p>

<h3>XI.</h3>

<p>
The prince now left the room and shut himself up in his own chamber. Colia
followed him almost at once, anxious to do what he could to console him. The
poor boy seemed to be already so attached to him that he could hardly leave
him.
</p>

<p>
“You were quite right to go away!” he said. “The row will
rage there worse than ever now; and it’s like this every day with
us—and all through that Nastasia Philipovna.”
</p>

<p>
“You have so many sources of trouble here, Colia,” said the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, indeed, and it is all our own fault. But I have a great friend who
is much worse off even than we are. Would you like to know him?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, very much. Is he one of your school-fellows?”
</p>

<p>
“Well, not exactly. I will tell you all about him some day.... What do
you think of Nastasia Philipovna? She is beautiful, isn’t she? I had
never seen her before, though I had a great wish to do so. She fascinated me. I
could forgive Gania if he were to marry her for love, but for money! Oh dear!
that is horrible!”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, your brother does not attract me much.”
</p>

<p>
“I am not surprised at that. After what you... But I do hate that way of
looking at things! Because some fool, or a rogue pretending to be a fool,
strikes a man, that man is to be dishonoured for his whole life, unless he
wipes out the disgrace with blood, or makes his assailant beg forgiveness on
his knees! I think that so very absurd and tyrannical. Lermontoff’s Bal
Masque is based on that idea—a stupid and unnatural one, in my opinion;
but he was hardly more than a child when he wrote it.”
</p>

<p>
“I like your sister very much.”
</p>

<p>
“Did you see how she spat in Gania’s face! Varia is afraid of no
one. But you did not follow her example, and yet I am sure it was not through
cowardice. Here she comes! Speak of a wolf and you see his tail! I felt sure
that she would come. She is very generous, though of course she has her
faults.”
</p>

<p>
Varia pounced upon her brother.
</p>

<p>
“This is not the place for you,” said she. “Go to father. Is
he plaguing you, prince?”
</p>

<p>
“Not in the least; on the contrary, he interests me.”
</p>

<p>
“Scolding as usual, Varia! It is the worst thing about her. After all, I
believe father may have started off with Rogojin. No doubt he is sorry now.
Perhaps I had better go and see what he is doing,” added Colia, running
off.
</p>

<p>
“Thank God, I have got mother away, and put her to bed without another
scene! Gania is worried—and ashamed—not without reason! What a
spectacle! I have come to thank you once more, prince, and to ask you if you
knew Nastasia Philipovna before?”
</p>

<p>
“No, I have never known her.”
</p>

<p>
“Then what did you mean, when you said straight out to her that she was
not really ‘like that’? You guessed right, I fancy. It is quite
possible she was not herself at the moment, though I cannot fathom her meaning.
Evidently she meant to hurt and insult us. I have heard curious tales about her
before now, but if she came to invite us to her house, why did she behave so to
my mother? Ptitsin knows her very well; he says he could not understand her
today. With Rogojin, too! No one with a spark of self-respect could have talked
like that in the house of her... Mother is extremely vexed on your account,
too...
</p>

<p>
“That is nothing!” said the prince, waving his hand.
</p>

<p>
“But how meek she was when you spoke to her!”
</p>

<p>
“Meek! What do you mean?”
</p>

<p>
“You told her it was a shame for her to behave so, and her manner changed
at once; she was like another person. You have some influence over her,
prince,” added Varia, smiling a little.
</p>

<p>
The door opened at this point, and in came Gania most unexpectedly.
</p>

<p>
He was not in the least disconcerted to see Varia there, but he stood a moment
at the door, and then approached the prince quietly.
</p>

<p>
“Prince,” he said, with feeling, “I was a blackguard. Forgive
me!” His face gave evidence of suffering. The prince was considerably
amazed, and did not reply at once. “Oh, come, forgive me, forgive
me!” Gania insisted, rather impatiently. “If you like, I’ll
kiss your hand. There!”
</p>

<p>
The prince was touched; he took Gania’s hands, and embraced him heartily,
while each kissed the other.
</p>

<p>
“I never, never thought you were like that,” said Muishkin, drawing
a deep breath. “I thought you—you weren’t capable
of—”
</p>

<p>
“Of what? Apologizing, eh? And where on earth did I get the idea that you
were an idiot? You always observe what other people pass by unnoticed; one
could talk sense to you, but—”
</p>

<p>
“Here is another to whom you should apologize,” said the prince,
pointing to Varia.
</p>

<p>
“No, no! they are all enemies! I’ve tried them often enough,
believe me,” and Gania turned his back on Varia with these words.
</p>

<p>
“But if I beg you to make it up?” said Varia.
</p>

<p>
“And you’ll go to Nastasia Philipovna’s this
evening—”
</p>

<p>
“If you insist: but, judge for yourself, can I go, ought I to go?”
</p>

<p>
“But she is not that sort of woman, I tell you!” said Gania,
angrily. “She was only acting.”
</p>

<p>
“I know that—I know that; but what a part to play! And think what
she must take <i>you</i> for, Gania! I know she kissed mother’s hand, and
all that, but she laughed at you, all the same. All this is not good enough for
seventy-five thousand roubles, my dear boy. You are capable of honourable
feelings still, and that’s why I am talking to you so. Oh! <i>do</i> take
care what you are doing! Don’t you know yourself that it will end badly,
Gania?”
</p>

<p>
So saying, and in a state of violent agitation, Varia left the room.
</p>

<p>
“There, they are all like that,” said Gania, laughing, “just
as if I do not know all about it much better than they do.”
</p>

<p>
He sat down with these words, evidently intending to prolong his visit.
</p>

<p>
“If you know it so well,” said the prince a little timidly,
“why do you choose all this worry for the sake of the seventy-five
thousand, which, you confess, does not cover it?”
</p>

<p>
“I didn’t mean that,” said Gania; “but while we are
upon the subject, let me hear your opinion. Is all this worry worth
seventy-five thousand or not?”
</p>

<p>
“Certainly not.”
</p>

<p>
“Of course! And it would be a disgrace to marry so, eh?”
</p>

<p>
“A great disgrace.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, well, then you may know that I shall certainly do it, now. I shall
certainly marry her. I was not quite sure of myself before, but now I am.
Don’t say a word: I know what you want to tell me—”
</p>

<p>
“No. I was only going to say that what surprises me most of all is your
extraordinary confidence.”
</p>

<p>
“How so? What in?”
</p>

<p>
“That Nastasia Philipovna will accept you, and that the question is as
good as settled; and secondly, that even if she did, you would be able to
pocket the money. Of course, I know very little about it, but that’s my
view. When a man marries for money it often happens that the wife keeps the
money in her own hands.”
</p>

<p>
“Of course, you don’t know all; but, I assure you, you
needn’t be afraid, it won’t be like that in our case. There are
circumstances,” said Gania, rather excitedly. “And as to her answer
to me, there’s no doubt about that. Why should you suppose she will
refuse me?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, I only judge by what I see. Varvara Ardalionovna said just
now—”
</p>

<p>
“Oh she—they don’t know anything about it! Nastasia was only
chaffing Rogojin. I was alarmed at first, but I have thought better of it now;
she was simply laughing at him. She looks on me as a fool because I show that I
meant her money, and doesn’t realize that there are other men who would
deceive her in far worse fashion. I’m not going to pretend anything, and
you’ll see she’ll marry me, all right. If she likes to live
quietly, so she shall; but if she gives me any of her nonsense, I shall leave
her at once, but I shall keep the money. I’m not going to look a fool;
that’s the first thing, not to look a fool.”
</p>

<p>
“But Nastasia Philipovna seems to me to be such a <i>sensible</i> woman,
and, as such, why should she run blindly into this business? That’s what
puzzles me so,” said the prince.
</p>

<p>
“You don’t know all, you see; I tell you there are things—and
besides, I’m sure that she is persuaded that I love her to distraction,
and I give you my word I have a strong suspicion that she loves me,
too—in her own way, of course. She thinks she will be able to make a sort
of slave of me all my life; but I shall prepare a little surprise for her. I
don’t know whether I ought to be confidential with you, prince; but, I
assure you, you are the only decent fellow I have come across. I have not
spoken so sincerely as I am doing at this moment for years. There are
uncommonly few honest people about, prince; there isn’t one honester than
Ptitsin, he’s the best of the lot. Are you laughing? You don’t
know, perhaps, that blackguards like honest people, and being one myself I like
you. <i>Why</i> am I a blackguard? Tell me honestly, now. They all call me a
blackguard because of her, and I have got into the way of thinking myself one.
That’s what is so bad about the business.”
</p>

<p>
“<i>I</i> for one shall never think you a blackguard again,” said
the prince. “I confess I had a poor opinion of you at first, but I have
been so joyfully surprised about you just now; it’s a good lesson for me.
I shall never judge again without a thorough trial. I see now that you are not
only not a blackguard, but are not even quite spoiled. I see that you are quite
an ordinary man, not original in the least degree, but rather weak.”
</p>

<p>
Gania laughed sarcastically, but said nothing. The prince, seeing that he did
not quite like the last remark, blushed, and was silent too.
</p>

<p>
“Has my father asked you for money?” asked Gania, suddenly.
</p>

<p>
“No.”
</p>

<p>
“Don’t give it to him if he does. Fancy, he was a decent,
respectable man once! He was received in the best society; he was not always
the liar he is now. Of course, wine is at the bottom of it all; but he is a
good deal worse than an innocent liar now. Do you know that he keeps a
mistress? I can’t understand how mother is so long-suffering. Did he tell
you the story of the siege of Kars? Or perhaps the one about his grey horse
that talked? He loves to enlarge on these absurd histories.” And Gania
burst into a fit of laughter. Suddenly he turned to the prince and asked:
“Why are you looking at me like that?”
</p>

<p>
“I am surprised to see you laugh in that way, like a child. You came to
make friends with me again just now, and you said, ‘I will kiss your
hand, if you like,’ just as a child would have said it. And then, all at
once you are talking of this mad project—of these seventy-five thousand
roubles! It all seems so absurd and impossible.”
</p>

<p>
“Well, what conclusion have you reached?”
</p>

<p>
“That you are rushing madly into the undertaking, and that you would do
well to think it over again. It is more than possible that Varvara Ardalionovna
is right.”
</p>

<p>
“Ah! now you begin to moralize! I know that I am only a child, very
well,” replied Gania impatiently. “That is proved by my having this
conversation with you. It is not for money only, prince, that I am rushing into
this affair,” he continued, hardly master of his words, so closely had
his vanity been touched. “If I reckoned on that I should certainly be
deceived, for I am still too weak in mind and character. I am obeying a
passion, an impulse perhaps, because I have but one aim, one that overmasters
all else. You imagine that once I am in possession of these seventy-five
thousand roubles, I shall rush to buy a carriage... No, I shall go on wearing
the old overcoat I have worn for three years, and I shall give up my club. I
shall follow the example of men who have made their fortunes. When Ptitsin was
seventeen he slept in the street, he sold pen-knives, and began with a copeck;
now he has sixty thousand roubles, but to get them, what has he not done? Well,
I shall be spared such a hard beginning, and shall start with a little capital.
In fifteen years people will say, ‘Look, that’s Ivolgin, the king
of the Jews!’ You say that I have no originality. Now mark this,
prince—there is nothing so offensive to a man of our time and race than
to be told that he is wanting in originality, that he is weak in character, has
no particular talent, and is, in short, an ordinary person. You have not even
done me the honour of looking upon me as a rogue. Do you know, I could have
knocked you down for that just now! You wounded me more cruelly than Epanchin,
who thinks me capable of selling him my wife! Observe, it was a perfectly
gratuitous idea on his part, seeing there has never been any discussion of it
between us! This has exasperated me, and I am determined to make a fortune! I
will do it! Once I am rich, I shall be a genius, an extremely original man. One
of the vilest and most hateful things connected with money is that it can buy
even talent; and will do so as long as the world lasts. You will say that this
is childish—or romantic. Well, that will be all the better for me, but
the thing shall be done. I will carry it through. He laughs most, who laughs
last. Why does Epanchin insult me? Simply because, socially, I am a nobody.
However, enough for the present. Colia has put his nose in to tell us dinner is
ready, twice. I’m dining out. I shall come and talk to you now and then;
you shall be comfortable enough with us. They are sure to make you one of the
family. I think you and I will either be great friends or enemies. Look here
now, supposing I had kissed your hand just now, as I offered to do in all
sincerity, should I have hated you for it afterwards?”
</p>

<p>
“Certainly, but not always. You would not have been able to keep it up,
and would have ended by forgiving me,” said the prince, after a pause for
reflection, and with a pleasant smile.
</p>

<p>
“Oho, how careful one has to be with you, prince! Haven’t you put a
drop of poison in that remark now, eh? By the way—ha, ha, ha!—I
forgot to ask, was I right in believing that you were a good deal struck
yourself with Nastasia Philipovna.”
</p>

<p>
“Ye-yes.”
</p>

<p>
“Are you in love with her?”
</p>

<p>
“N-no.”
</p>

<p>
“And yet you flush up as red as a rosebud! Come—it’s all
right. I’m not going to laugh at you. Do you know she is a very virtuous
woman? Believe it or not, as you like. You think she and Totski—not a bit
of it, not a bit of it! Not for ever so long! <i>Au revoir!</i>”
</p>

<p>
Gania left the room in great good humour. The prince stayed behind, and
meditated alone for a few minutes. At length, Colia popped his head in once
more.
</p>

<p>
“I don’t want any dinner, thanks, Colia. I had too good a lunch at
General Epanchin’s.”
</p>

<p>
Colia came into the room and gave the prince a note; it was from the general
and was carefully sealed up. It was clear from Colia’s face how painful
it was to him to deliver the missive. The prince read it, rose, and took his
hat.
</p>

<p>
“It’s only a couple of yards,” said Colia, blushing.
</p>

<p>
“He’s sitting there over his bottle—and how they can give him
credit, I cannot understand. Don’t tell mother I brought you the note,
prince; I have sworn not to do it a thousand times, but I’m always so
sorry for him. Don’t stand on ceremony, give him some trifle, and let
that end it.”
</p>

<p>
“Come along, Colia, I want to see your father. I have an idea,”
said the prince.
</p>

<h3>XII.</h3>

<p>
Colia took the prince to a public-house in the Litaynaya, not far off. In one
of the side rooms there sat at a table—looking like one of the regular
guests of the establishment—Ardalion Alexandrovitch, with a bottle before
him, and a newspaper on his knee. He was waiting for the prince, and no sooner
did the latter appear than he began a long harangue about something or other;
but so far gone was he that the prince could hardly understand a word.
</p>

<p>
“I have not got a ten-rouble note,” said the prince; “but
here is a twenty-five. Change it and give me back the fifteen, or I shall be
left without a farthing myself.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, of course, of course; and you quite understand that I—”
</p>

<p>
“Yes; and I have another request to make, general. Have you ever been at
Nastasia Philipovna’s?”
</p>

<p>
“I? I? Do you mean me? Often, my friend, often! I only pretended I had
not in order to avoid a painful subject. You saw today, you were a witness,
that I did all that a kind, an indulgent father could do. Now a father of
altogether another type shall step into the scene. You shall see; the old
soldier shall lay bare this intrigue, or a shameless woman will force her way
into a respectable and noble family.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, quite so. I wished to ask you whether you could show me the way to
Nastasia Philipovna’s tonight. I must go; I have business with her; I was
not invited but I was introduced. Anyhow I am ready to trespass the laws of
propriety if only I can get in somehow or other.”
</p>

<p>
“My dear young friend, you have hit on my very idea. It was not for this
rubbish I asked you to come over here” (he pocketed the money, however,
at this point), “it was to invite your alliance in the campaign against
Nastasia Philipovna tonight. How well it sounds, ‘General Ivolgin and
Prince Muishkin.’ That’ll fetch her, I think, eh? Capital!
We’ll go at nine; there’s time yet.”
</p>

<p>
“Where does she live?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, a long way off, near the Great Theatre, just in the square
there—It won’t be a large party.”
</p>

<p>
The general sat on and on. He had ordered a fresh bottle when the prince
arrived; this took him an hour to drink, and then he had another, and another,
during the consumption of which he told pretty nearly the whole story of his
life. The prince was in despair. He felt that though he had but applied to this
miserable old drunkard because he saw no other way of getting to Nastasia
Philipovna’s, yet he had been very wrong to put the slightest confidence
in such a man.
</p>

<p>
At last he rose and declared that he would wait no longer. The general rose
too, drank the last drops that he could squeeze out of the bottle, and
staggered into the street.
</p>

<p>
Muishkin began to despair. He could not imagine how he had been so foolish as
to trust this man. He only wanted one thing, and that was to get to Nastasia
Philipovna’s, even at the cost of a certain amount of impropriety. But
now the scandal threatened to be more than he had bargained for. By this time
Ardalion Alexandrovitch was quite intoxicated, and he kept his companion
listening while he discoursed eloquently and pathetically on subjects of all
kinds, interspersed with torrents of recrimination against the members of his
family. He insisted that all his troubles were caused by their bad conduct, and
time alone would put an end to them.
</p>

<p>
At last they reached the Litaynaya. The thaw increased steadily, a warm,
unhealthy wind blew through the streets, vehicles splashed through the mud, and
the iron shoes of horses and mules rang on the paving stones. Crowds of
melancholy people plodded wearily along the footpaths, with here and there a
drunken man among them.
</p>

<p>
“Do you see those brightly-lighted windows?” said the general.
“Many of my old comrades-in-arms live about here, and I, who served
longer, and suffered more than any of them, am walking on foot to the house of
a woman of rather questionable reputation! A man, look you, who has thirteen
bullets on his breast!... You don’t believe it? Well, I can assure you it
was entirely on my account that Pirogoff telegraphed to Paris, and left
Sebastopol at the greatest risk during the siege. Nelaton, the Tuileries
surgeon, demanded a safe conduct, in the name of science, into the besieged
city in order to attend my wounds. The government knows all about it.
‘That’s the Ivolgin with thirteen bullets in him!’
That’s how they speak of me.... Do you see that house, prince? One of my
old friends lives on the first floor, with his large family. In this and five
other houses, three overlooking Nevsky, two in the Morskaya, are all that
remain of my personal friends. Nina Alexandrovna gave them up long ago, but I
keep in touch with them still... I may say I find refreshment in this little
coterie, in thus meeting my old acquaintances and subordinates, who worship me
still, in spite of all. General Sokolovitch (by the way, I have not called on
him lately, or seen Anna Fedorovna)... You know, my dear prince, when a person
does not receive company himself, he gives up going to other people’s
houses involuntarily. And yet... well... you look as if you didn’t
believe me.... Well now, why should I not present the son of my old friend and
companion to this delightful family—General Ivolgin and Prince Muishkin?
You will see a lovely girl—what am I saying—a lovely girl? No,
indeed, two, three! Ornaments of this city and of society: beauty, education,
culture—the woman question—poetry—everything! Added to which
is the fact that each one will have a dot of at least eighty thousand roubles.
No bad thing, eh?... In a word I absolutely must introduce you to them: it is a
duty, an obligation. General Ivolgin and Prince Muishkin. Tableau!”
</p>

<p>
“At once? Now? You must have forgotten...” began the prince.
</p>

<p>
“No, I have forgotten nothing. Come! This is the house—up this
magnificent staircase. I am surprised not to see the porter, but .... it is a
holiday... and the man has gone off... Drunken fool! Why have they not got rid
of him? Sokolovitch owes all the happiness he has had in the service and in his
private life to me, and me alone, but... here we are.”
</p>

<p>
The prince followed quietly, making no further objection for fear of irritating
the old man. At the same time he fervently hoped that General Sokolovitch and
his family would fade away like a mirage in the desert, so that the visitors
could escape, by merely returning downstairs. But to his horror he saw that
General Ivolgin was quite familiar with the house, and really seemed to have
friends there. At every step he named some topographical or biographical detail
that left nothing to be desired on the score of accuracy. When they arrived at
last, on the first floor, and the general turned to ring the bell to the right,
the prince decided to run away, but a curious incident stopped him momentarily.
</p>

<p>
“You have made a mistake, general,” said he. “The name on the
door is Koulakoff, and you were going to see General Sokolovitch.”
</p>

<p>
“Koulakoff... Koulakoff means nothing. This is Sokolovitch’s flat,
and I am ringing at his door.... What do I care for Koulakoff?... Here comes
someone to open.”
</p>

<p>
In fact, the door opened directly, and the footman informed the visitors that
the family were all away.
</p>

<p>
“What a pity! What a pity! It’s just my luck!” repeated
Ardalion Alexandrovitch over and over again, in regretful tones. “When
your master and mistress return, my man, tell them that General Ivolgin and
Prince Muishkin desired to present themselves, and that they were extremely
sorry, excessively grieved...”
</p>

<p>
Just then another person belonging to the household was seen at the back of the
hall. It was a woman of some forty years, dressed in sombre colours, probably a
housekeeper or a governess. Hearing the names she came forward with a look of
suspicion on her face.
</p>

<p>
“Marie Alexandrovna is not at home,” said she, staring hard at the
general. “She has gone to her mother’s, with Alexandra
Michailovna.”
</p>

<p>
“Alexandra Michailovna out, too! How disappointing! Would you believe it,
I am always so unfortunate! May I most respectfully ask you to present my
compliments to Alexandra Michailovna, and remind her... tell her, that with my
whole heart I wish for her what she wished for herself on Thursday evening,
while she was listening to Chopin’s Ballade. She will remember. I wish it
with all sincerity. General Ivolgin and Prince Muishkin!”
</p>

<p>
The woman’s face changed; she lost her suspicious expression.
</p>

<p>
“I will not fail to deliver your message,” she replied, and bowed
them out.
</p>

<p>
As they went downstairs the general regretted repeatedly that he had failed to
introduce the prince to his friends.
</p>

<p>
“You know I am a bit of a poet,” said he. “Have you noticed
it? The poetic soul, you know.” Then he added suddenly—“But
after all... after all I believe we made a mistake this time! I remember that
the Sokolovitch’s live in another house, and what is more, they are just
now in Moscow. Yes, I certainly was at fault. However, it is of no
consequence.”
</p>

<p>
“Just tell me,” said the prince in reply, “may I count still
on your assistance? Or shall I go on alone to see Nastasia Philipovna?”
</p>

<p>
“Count on my assistance? Go alone? How can you ask me that question, when
it is a matter on which the fate of my family so largely depends? You
don’t know Ivolgin, my friend. To trust Ivolgin is to trust a rock;
that’s how the first squadron I commanded spoke of me. ‘Depend upon
Ivolgin,’ said they all, ‘he is as steady as a rock.’ But,
excuse me, I must just call at a house on our way, a house where I have found
consolation and help in all my trials for years.”
</p>

<p>
“You are going home?”
</p>

<p>
“No... I wish... to visit Madame Terentieff, the widow of Captain
Terentieff, my old subordinate and friend. She helps me to keep up my courage,
and to bear the trials of my domestic life, and as I have an extra burden on my
mind today...”
</p>

<p>
“It seems to me,” interrupted the prince, “that I was foolish
to trouble you just now. However, at present you... Good-bye!”
</p>

<p>
“Indeed, you must not go away like that, young man, you must not!”
cried the general. “My friend here is a widow, the mother of a family;
her words come straight from her heart, and find an echo in mine. A visit to
her is merely an affair of a few minutes; I am quite at home in her house. I
will have a wash, and dress, and then we can drive to the Grand Theatre. Make
up your mind to spend the evening with me.... We are just
there—that’s the house... Why, Colia! you here! Well, is Marfa
Borisovna at home or have you only just come?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh no! I have been here a long while,” replied Colia, who was at
the front door when the general met him. “I am keeping Hippolyte company.
He is worse, and has been in bed all day. I came down to buy some cards. Marfa
Borisovna expects you. But what a state you are in, father!” added the
boy, noticing his father’s unsteady gait. “Well, let us go
in.”
</p>

<p>
On meeting Colia the prince determined to accompany the general, though he made
up his mind to stay as short a time as possible. He wanted Colia, but firmly
resolved to leave the general behind. He could not forgive himself for being so
simple as to imagine that Ivolgin would be of any use. The three climbed up the
long staircase until they reached the fourth floor where Madame Terentieff
lived.
</p>

<p>
“You intend to introduce the prince?” asked Colia, as they went up.
</p>

<p>
“Yes, my boy. I wish to present him: General Ivolgin and Prince Muishkin!
But what’s the matter?... what?... How is Marfa Borisovna?”
</p>

<p>
“You know, father, you would have done much better not to come at all!
She is ready to eat you up! You have not shown yourself since the day before
yesterday and she is expecting the money. Why did you promise her any? You are
always the same! Well, now you will have to get out of it as best you
can.”
</p>

<p>
They stopped before a somewhat low doorway on the fourth floor. Ardalion
Alexandrovitch, evidently much out of countenance, pushed Muishkin in front.
</p>

<p>
“I will wait here,” he stammered. “I should like to surprise
her. ....”
</p>

<p>
Colia entered first, and as the door stood open, the mistress of the house
peeped out. The surprise of the general’s imagination fell very flat, for
she at once began to address him in terms of reproach.
</p>

<p>
Marfa Borisovna was about forty years of age. She wore a dressing-jacket, her
feet were in slippers, her face painted, and her hair was in dozens of small
plaits. No sooner did she catch sight of Ardalion Alexandrovitch than she
screamed:
</p>

<p>
“There he is, that wicked, mean wretch! I knew it was he! My heart
misgave me!”
</p>

<p>
The old man tried to put a good face on the affair.
</p>

<p>
“Come, let us go in—it’s all right,” he whispered in
the prince’s ear.
</p>

<p>
But it was more serious than he wished to think. As soon as the visitors had
crossed the low dark hall, and entered the narrow reception-room, furnished
with half a dozen cane chairs, and two small card-tables, Madame Terentieff, in
the shrill tones habitual to her, continued her stream of invectives.
</p>

<p>
“Are you not ashamed? Are you not ashamed? You barbarian! You tyrant! You
have robbed me of all I possessed—you have sucked my bones to the marrow.
How long shall I be your victim? Shameless, dishonourable man!”
</p>

<p>
“Marfa Borisovna! Marfa Borisovna! Here is... the Prince Muishkin!
General Ivolgin and Prince Muishkin,” stammered the disconcerted old man.
</p>

<p>
“Would you believe,” said the mistress of the house, suddenly
addressing the prince, “would you believe that that man has not even
spared my orphan children? He has stolen everything I possessed, sold
everything, pawned everything; he has left me nothing—nothing! What am I
to do with your IOU’s, you cunning, unscrupulous rogue? Answer, devourer!
answer, heart of stone! How shall I feed my orphans? with what shall I nourish
them? And now he has come, he is drunk! He can scarcely stand. How, oh how,
have I offended the Almighty, that He should bring this curse upon me! Answer,
you worthless villain, answer!”
</p>

<p>
But this was too much for the general.
</p>

<p>
“Here are twenty-five roubles, Marfa Borisovna... it is all that I can
give... and I owe even these to the prince’s generosity—my noble
friend. I have been cruelly deceived. Such is... life... Now... Excuse me, I am
very weak,” he continued, standing in the centre of the room, and bowing
to all sides. “I am faint; excuse me! Lenotchka... a cushion... my
dear!”
</p>

<p>
Lenotchka, a little girl of eight, ran to fetch the cushion at once, and placed
it on the rickety old sofa. The general meant to have said much more, but as
soon as he had stretched himself out, he turned his face to the wall, and slept
the sleep of the just.
</p>

<p>
With a grave and ceremonious air, Marfa Borisovna motioned the prince to a
chair at one of the card-tables. She seated herself opposite, leaned her right
cheek on her hand, and sat in silence, her eyes fixed on Muishkin, now and
again sighing deeply. The three children, two little girls and a boy, Lenotchka
being the eldest, came and leant on the table and also stared steadily at him.
Presently Colia appeared from the adjoining room.
</p>

<p>
“I am very glad indeed to have met you here, Colia,” said the
prince. “Can you do something for me? I must see Nastasia Philipovna, and
I asked Ardalion Alexandrovitch just now to take me to her house, but he has
gone to sleep, as you see. Will you show me the way, for I do not know the
street? I have the address, though; it is close to the Grand Theatre.”
</p>

<p>
“Nastasia Philipovna? She does not live there, and to tell you the truth
my father has never been to her house! It is strange that you should have
depended on him! She lives near Wladimir Street, at the Five Corners, and it is
quite close by. Will you go directly? It is just half-past nine. I will show
you the way with pleasure.”
</p>

<p>
Colia and the prince went off together. Alas! the latter had no money to pay
for a cab, so they were obliged to walk.
</p>

<p>
“I should have liked to have taken you to see Hippolyte,” said
Colia. “He is the eldest son of the lady you met just now, and was in the
next room. He is ill, and has been in bed all day. But he is rather strange,
and extremely sensitive, and I thought he might be upset considering the
circumstances in which you came... Somehow it touches me less, as it concerns
my father, while it is <i>his</i> mother. That, of course, makes a great
difference. What is a terrible disgrace to a woman, does not disgrace a man, at
least not in the same way. Perhaps public opinion is wrong in condemning one
sex, and excusing the other. Hippolyte is an extremely clever boy, but so
prejudiced. He is really a slave to his opinions.”
</p>

<p>
“Do you say he is consumptive?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes. It really would be happier for him to die young. If I were in his
place I should certainly long for death. He is unhappy about his brother and
sisters, the children you saw. If it were possible, if we only had a little
money, we should leave our respective families, and live together in a little
apartment of our own. It is our dream. But, do you know, when I was talking
over your affair with him, he was angry, and said that anyone who did not call
out a man who had given him a blow was a coward. He is very irritable to-day,
and I left off arguing the matter with him. So Nastasia Philipovna has invited
you to go and see her?”
</p>

<p>
“To tell the truth, she has not.”
</p>

<p>
“Then how do you come to be going there?” cried Colia, so much
astonished that he stopped short in the middle of the pavement. “And...
and are you going to her ‘At Home’ in that costume?”
</p>

<p>
“I don’t know, really, whether I shall be allowed in at all. If she
will receive me, so much the better. If not, the matter is ended. As to my
clothes—what can I do?”
</p>

<p>
“Are you going there for some particular reason, or only as a way of
getting into her society, and that of her friends?”
</p>

<p>
“No, I have really an object in going... That is, I am going on business
it is difficult to explain, but...”
</p>

<p>
“Well, whether you go on business or not is your affair, I do not want to
know. The only important thing, in my eyes, is that you should not be going
there simply for the pleasure of spending your evening in such
company—cocottes, generals, usurers! If that were the case I should
despise and laugh at you. There are terribly few honest people here, and hardly
any whom one can respect, although people put on airs—Varia especially!
Have you noticed, prince, how many adventurers there are nowadays? Especially
here, in our dear Russia. How it has happened I never can understand. There
used to be a certain amount of solidity in all things, but now what happens?
Everything is exposed to the public gaze, veils are thrown back, every wound is
probed by careless fingers. We are for ever present at an orgy of scandalous
revelations. Parents blush when they remember their old-fashioned morality. At
Moscow lately a father was heard urging his son to stop at nothing—at
nothing, mind you!—to get money! The press seized upon the story, of
course, and now it is public property. Look at my father, the general! See what
he is, and yet, I assure you, he is an honest man! Only... he drinks too much,
and his morals are not all we could desire. Yes, that’s true! I pity him,
to tell the truth, but I dare not say so, because everybody would laugh at
me—but I do pity him! And who are the really clever men, after all?
Money-grubbers, every one of them, from the first to the last. Hippolyte finds
excuses for money-lending, and says it is a necessity. He talks about the
economic movement, and the ebb and flow of capital; the devil knows what he
means. It makes me angry to hear him talk so, but he is soured by his troubles.
Just imagine—the general keeps his mother—but she lends him money!
She lends it for a week or ten days at very high interest! Isn’t it
disgusting? And then, you would hardly believe it, but my mother—Nina
Alexandrovna—helps Hippolyte in all sorts of ways, sends him money and
clothes. She even goes as far as helping the children, through Hippolyte,
because their mother cares nothing about them, and Varia does the same.”
</p>

<p>
“Well, just now you said there were no honest nor good people about, that
there were only money-grubbers—and here they are quite close at hand,
these honest and good people, your mother and Varia! I think there is a good
deal of moral strength in helping people in such circumstances.”
</p>

<p>
“Varia does it from pride, and likes showing off, and giving herself
airs. As to my mother, I really do admire her—yes, and honour her.
Hippolyte, hardened as he is, feels it. He laughed at first, and thought it
vulgar of her—but now, he is sometimes quite touched and overcome by her
kindness. H’m! You call that being strong and good? I will remember that!
Gania knows nothing about it. He would say that it was encouraging vice.”
</p>

<p>
“Ah, Gania knows nothing about it? It seems there are many things that
Gania does not know,” exclaimed the prince, as he considered
Colia’s last words.
</p>

<p>
“Do you know, I like you very much indeed, prince? I shall never forget
about this afternoon.”
</p>

<p>
“I like you too, Colia.”
</p>

<p>
“Listen to me! You are going to live here, are you not?” said
Colia. “I mean to get something to do directly, and earn money. Then
shall we three live together? You, and I, and Hippolyte? We will hire a flat,
and let the general come and visit us. What do you say?”
</p>

<p>
“It would be very pleasant,” returned the prince. “But we
must see. I am really rather worried just now. What! are we there already? Is
that the house? What a long flight of steps! And there’s a porter! Well,
Colia I don’t know what will come of it all.”
</p>

<p>
The prince seemed quite distracted for the moment.
</p>

<p>
“You must tell me all about it tomorrow! Don’t be afraid. I wish
you success; we agree so entirely that I can do so, although I do not
understand why you are here. Good-bye!” cried Colia excitedly. “Now
I will rush back and tell Hippolyte all about our plans and proposals! But as
to your getting in—don’t be in the least afraid. You will see her.
She is so original about everything. It’s the first floor. The porter
will show you.”
</p>

<h3>XIII.</h3>

<p>
The prince was very nervous as he reached the outer door; but he did his best
to encourage himself with the reflection that the worst thing that could happen
to him would be that he would not be received, or, perhaps, received, then
laughed at for coming.
</p>

<p>
But there was another question, which terrified him considerably, and that was:
what was he going to do when he <i>did</i> get in? And to this question he
could fashion no satisfactory reply.
</p>

<p>
If only he could find an opportunity of coming close up to Nastasia Philipovna
and saying to her: “Don’t ruin yourself by marrying this man. He
does not love you, he only loves your money. He told me so himself, and so did
Aglaya Ivanovna, and I have come on purpose to warn you”—but even
that did not seem quite a legitimate or practicable thing to do. Then, again,
there was another delicate question, to which he could not find an answer;
dared not, in fact, think of it; but at the very idea of which he trembled and
blushed. However, in spite of all his fears and heart-quakings he went in, and
asked for Nastasia Philipovna.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia occupied a medium-sized, but distinctly tasteful, flat, beautifully
furnished and arranged. At one period of these five years of Petersburg life,
Totski had certainly not spared his expenditure upon her. He had calculated
upon her eventual love, and tried to tempt her with a lavish outlay upon
comforts and luxuries, knowing too well how easily the heart accustoms itself
to comforts, and how difficult it is to tear one’s self away from
luxuries which have become habitual and, little by little, indispensable.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia did not reject all this, she even loved her comforts and luxuries,
but, strangely enough, never became, in the least degree, dependent upon them,
and always gave the impression that she could do just as well without them. In
fact, she went so far as to inform Totski on several occasions that such was
the case, which the latter gentleman considered a very unpleasant communication
indeed.
</p>

<p>
But, of late, Totski had observed many strange and original features and
characteristics in Nastasia, which he had neither known nor reckoned upon in
former times, and some of these fascinated him, even now, in spite of the fact
that all his old calculations with regard to her were long ago cast to the
winds.
</p>

<p>
A maid opened the door for the prince (Nastasia’s servants were all
females) and, to his surprise, received his request to announce him to her
mistress without any astonishment. Neither his dirty boots, nor his
wide-brimmed hat, nor his sleeveless cloak, nor his evident confusion of
manner, produced the least impression upon her. She helped him off with his
cloak, and begged him to wait a moment in the ante-room while she announced
him.
</p>

<p>
The company assembled at Nastasia Philipovna’s consisted of none but her
most intimate friends, and formed a very small party in comparison with her
usual gatherings on this anniversary.
</p>

<p>
In the first place there were present Totski, and General Epanchin. They were
both highly amiable, but both appeared to be labouring under a half-hidden
feeling of anxiety as to the result of Nastasia’s deliberations with
regard to Gania, which result was to be made public this evening.
</p>

<p>
Then, of course, there was Gania who was by no means so amiable as his elders,
but stood apart, gloomy, and miserable, and silent. He had determined not to
bring Varia with him; but Nastasia had not even asked after her, though no
sooner had he arrived than she had reminded him of the episode between himself
and the prince. The general, who had heard nothing of it before, began to
listen with some interest, while Gania, drily, but with perfect candour, went
through the whole history, including the fact of his apology to the prince. He
finished by declaring that the prince was a most extraordinary man, and
goodness knows why he had been considered an idiot hitherto, for he was very
far from being one.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia listened to all this with great interest; but the conversation soon
turned to Rogojin and his visit, and this theme proved of the greatest
attraction to both Totski and the general.
</p>

<p>
Ptitsin was able to afford some particulars as to Rogojin’s conduct since
the afternoon. He declared that he had been busy finding money for the latter
ever since, and up to nine o’clock, Rogojin having declared that he must
absolutely have a hundred thousand roubles by the evening. He added that
Rogojin was drunk, of course; but that he thought the money would be
forthcoming, for the excited and intoxicated rapture of the fellow impelled him
to give any interest or premium that was asked of him, and there were several
others engaged in beating up the money, also.
</p>

<p>
All this news was received by the company with somewhat gloomy interest.
Nastasia was silent, and would not say what she thought about it. Gania was
equally uncommunicative. The general seemed the most anxious of all, and
decidedly uneasy. The present of pearls which he had prepared with so much joy
in the morning had been accepted but coldly, and Nastasia had smiled rather
disagreeably as she took it from him. Ferdishenko was the only person present
in good spirits.
</p>

<p>
Totski himself, who had the reputation of being a capital talker, and was
usually the life and soul of these entertainments, was as silent as any on this
occasion, and sat in a state of, for him, most uncommon perturbation.
</p>

<p>
The rest of the guests (an old tutor or schoolmaster, goodness knows why
invited; a young man, very timid, and shy and silent; a rather loud woman of
about forty, apparently an actress; and a very pretty, well-dressed German lady
who hardly said a word all the evening) not only had no gift for enlivening the
proceedings, but hardly knew what to say for themselves when addressed. Under
these circumstances the arrival of the prince came almost as a godsend.
</p>

<p>
The announcement of his name gave rise to some surprise and to some smiles,
especially when it became evident, from Nastasia’s astonished look, that
she had not thought of inviting him. But her astonishment once over, Nastasia
showed such satisfaction that all prepared to greet the prince with cordial
smiles of welcome.
</p>

<p>
“Of course,” remarked General Epanchin, “he does this out of
pure innocence. It’s a little dangerous, perhaps, to encourage this sort
of freedom; but it is rather a good thing that he has arrived just at this
moment. He may enliven us a little with his originalities.”
</p>

<p>
“Especially as he asked himself,” said Ferdishenko.
</p>

<p>
“What’s that got to do with it?” asked the general, who
loathed Ferdishenko.
</p>

<p>
“Why, he must pay toll for his entrance,” explained the latter.
</p>

<p>
“H’m! Prince Muishkin is not Ferdishenko,” said the general,
impatiently. This worthy gentleman could never quite reconcile himself to the
idea of meeting Ferdishenko in society, and on an equal footing.
</p>

<p>
“Oh general, spare Ferdishenko!” replied the other, smiling.
“I have special privileges.”
</p>

<p>
“What do you mean by special privileges?”
</p>

<p>
“Once before I had the honour of stating them to the company. I will
repeat the explanation to-day for your excellency’s benefit. You see,
excellency, all the world is witty and clever except myself. I am neither. As a
kind of compensation I am allowed to tell the truth, for it is a well-known
fact that only stupid people tell ‘the truth.’ Added to this, I am
a spiteful man, just because I am not clever. If I am offended or injured I
bear it quite patiently until the man injuring me meets with some misfortune.
Then I remember, and take my revenge. I return the injury sevenfold, as Ivan
Petrovitch Ptitsin says. (Of course he never does so himself.) Excellency, no
doubt you recollect Kryloff’s fable, ‘The Lion and the Ass’?
Well now, that’s you and I. That fable was written precisely for
us.”
</p>

<p>
“You seem to be talking nonsense again, Ferdishenko,” growled the
general.
</p>

<p>
“What is the matter, excellency? I know how to keep my place. When I said
just now that we, you and I, were the lion and the ass of Kryloff’s
fable, of course it is understood that I take the role of the ass. Your
excellency is the lion of which the fable remarks:
</p>

<p class="poem">
‘A mighty lion, terror of the woods,<br />
Was shorn of his great prowess by old age.’
</p>

<p>
And I, your excellency, am the ass.”
</p>

<p>
“I am of your opinion on that last point,” said Ivan Fedorovitch,
with ill-concealed irritation.
</p>

<p>
All this was no doubt extremely coarse, and moreover it was premeditated, but
after all Ferdishenko had persuaded everyone to accept him as a buffoon.
</p>

<p>
“If I am admitted and tolerated here,” he had said one day,
“it is simply because I talk in this way. How can anyone possibly receive
such a man as I am? I quite understand. Now, could I, a Ferdishenko, be allowed
to sit shoulder to shoulder with a clever man like Afanasy Ivanovitch? There is
one explanation, only one. I am given the position because it is so entirely
inconceivable!”
</p>

<p>
But these vulgarities seemed to please Nastasia Philipovna, although too often
they were both rude and offensive. Those who wished to go to her house were
forced to put up with Ferdishenko. Possibly the latter was not mistaken in
imagining that he was received simply in order to annoy Totski, who disliked
him extremely. Gania also was often made the butt of the jester’s
sarcasms, who used this method of keeping in Nastasia Philipovna’s good
graces.
</p>

<p>
“The prince will begin by singing us a fashionable ditty,” remarked
Ferdishenko, and looked at the mistress of the house, to see what she would
say.
</p>

<p>
“I don’t think so, Ferdishenko; please be quiet,” answered
Nastasia Philipovna dryly.
</p>

<p>
“A-ah! if he is to be under special patronage, I withdraw my
claws.”
</p>

<p>
But Nastasia Philipovna had now risen and advanced to meet the prince.
</p>

<p>
“I was so sorry to have forgotten to ask you to come, when I saw
you,” she said, “and I am delighted to be able to thank you
personally now, and to express my pleasure at your resolution.”
</p>

<p>
So saying she gazed into his eyes, longing to see whether she could make any
guess as to the explanation of his motive in coming to her house. The prince
would very likely have made some reply to her kind words, but he was so dazzled
by her appearance that he could not speak.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia noticed this with satisfaction. She was in full dress this evening;
and her appearance was certainly calculated to impress all beholders. She took
his hand and led him towards her other guests. But just before they reached the
drawing-room door, the prince stopped her, and hurriedly and in great agitation
whispered to her:
</p>

<p>
“You are altogether perfection; even your pallor and thinness are
perfect; one could not wish you otherwise. I did so wish to come and see you.
I—forgive me, please—”
</p>

<p>
“Don’t apologize,” said Nastasia, laughing; “you spoil
the whole originality of the thing. I think what they say about you must be
true, that you are so original.—So you think me perfection, do
you?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes.”
</p>

<p>
“H’m! Well, you may be a good reader of riddles but you are wrong
<i>there</i>, at all events. I’ll remind you of this, tonight.”
</p>

<p>
Nastasia introduced the prince to her guests, to most of whom he was already
known.
</p>

<p>
Totski immediately made some amiable remark. All seemed to brighten up at once,
and the conversation became general. Nastasia made the prince sit down next to
herself.
</p>

<p>
“Dear me, there’s nothing so very curious about the prince dropping
in, after all,” remarked Ferdishenko.
</p>

<p>
“It’s quite a clear case,” said the hitherto silent Gania.
“I have watched the prince almost all day, ever since the moment when he
first saw Nastasia Philipovna’s portrait, at General Epanchin’s. I
remember thinking at the time what I am now pretty sure of; and what, I may say
in passing, the prince confessed to myself.”
</p>

<p>
Gania said all this perfectly seriously, and without the slightest appearance
of joking; indeed, he seemed strangely gloomy.
</p>

<p>
“I did not confess anything to you,” said the prince, blushing.
“I only answered your question.”
</p>

<p>
“Bravo! That’s frank, at any rate!” shouted Ferdishenko, and
there was general laughter.
</p>

<p>
“Oh prince, prince! I never should have thought it of you;” said
General Epanchin. “And I imagined you a philosopher! Oh, you silent
fellows!”
</p>

<p>
“Judging from the fact that the prince blushed at this innocent joke,
like a young girl, I should think that he must, as an honourable man, harbour
the noblest intentions,” said the old toothless schoolmaster, most
unexpectedly; he had not so much as opened his mouth before. This remark
provoked general mirth, and the old fellow himself laughed loudest of the lot,
but ended with a stupendous fit of coughing.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia Philipovna, who loved originality and drollery of all kinds, was
apparently very fond of this old man, and rang the bell for more tea to stop
his coughing. It was now half-past ten o’clock.
</p>

<p>
“Gentlemen, wouldn’t you like a little champagne now?” she
asked. “I have it all ready; it will cheer us up—do now—no
ceremony!”
</p>

<p>
This invitation to drink, couched, as it was, in such informal terms, came very
strangely from Nastasia Philipovna. Her usual entertainments were not quite
like this; there was more style about them. However, the wine was not refused;
each guest took a glass excepting Gania, who drank nothing.
</p>

<p>
It was extremely difficult to account for Nastasia’s strange condition of
mind, which became more evident each moment, and which none could avoid
noticing.
</p>

<p>
She took her glass, and vowed she would empty it three times that evening. She
was hysterical, and laughed aloud every other minute with no apparent
reason—the next moment relapsing into gloom and thoughtfulness.
</p>

<p>
Some of her guests suspected that she must be ill; but concluded at last that
she was expecting something, for she continued to look at her watch impatiently
and unceasingly; she was most absent and strange.
</p>

<p>
“You seem to be a little feverish tonight,” said the actress.
</p>

<p>
“Yes; I feel quite ill. I have been obliged to put on this shawl—I
feel so cold,” replied Nastasia. She certainly had grown very pale, and
every now and then she tried to suppress a trembling in her limbs.
</p>

<p>
“Had we not better allow our hostess to retire?” asked Totski of
the general.
</p>

<p>
“Not at all, gentlemen, not at all! Your presence is absolutely necessary
to me tonight,” said Nastasia, significantly.
</p>

<p>
As most of those present were aware that this evening a certain very important
decision was to be taken, these words of Nastasia Philipovna’s appeared
to be fraught with much hidden interest. The general and Totski exchanged
looks; Gania fidgeted convulsively in his chair.
</p>

<p>
“Let’s play at some game!” suggested the actress.
</p>

<p>
“I know a new and most delightful game, added Ferdishenko.
</p>

<p>
“What is it?” asked the actress.
</p>

<p>
“Well, when we tried it we were a party of people, like this, for
instance; and somebody proposed that each of us, without leaving his place at
the table, should relate something about himself. It had to be something that
he really and honestly considered the very worst action he had ever committed
in his life. But he was to be honest—that was the chief point! He
wasn’t to be allowed to lie.”
</p>

<p>
“What an extraordinary idea!” said the general.
</p>

<p>
“That’s the beauty of it, general!”
</p>

<p>
“It’s a funny notion,” said Totski, “and yet quite
natural—it’s only a new way of boasting.”
</p>

<p>
“Perhaps that is just what was so fascinating about it.”
</p>

<p>
“Why, it would be a game to cry over—not to laugh at!” said
the actress.
</p>

<p>
“Did it succeed?” asked Nastasia Philipovna. “Come,
let’s try it, let’s try it; we really are not quite so jolly as we
might be—let’s try it! We may like it; it’s original, at all
events!”
</p>

<p>
“Yes,” said Ferdishenko; “it’s a good idea—come
along—the men begin. Of course no one need tell a story if he prefers to
be disobliging. We must draw lots! Throw your slips of paper, gentlemen, into
this hat, and the prince shall draw for turns. It’s a very simple game;
all you have to do is to tell the story of the worst action of your life.
It’s as simple as anything. I’ll prompt anyone who forgets the
rules!”
</p>

<p>
No one liked the idea much. Some smiled, some frowned; some objected, but
faintly, not wishing to oppose Nastasia’s wishes; for this new idea
seemed to be rather well received by her. She was still in an excited,
hysterical state, laughing convulsively at nothing and everything. Her eyes
were blazing, and her cheeks showed two bright red spots against the white. The
melancholy appearance of some of her guests seemed to add to her sarcastic
humour, and perhaps the very cynicism and cruelty of the game proposed by
Ferdishenko pleased her. At all events she was attracted by the idea, and
gradually her guests came round to her side; the thing was original, at least,
and might turn out to be amusing. “And supposing it’s something
that one—one can’t speak about before ladies?” asked the
timid and silent young man.
</p>

<p>
“Why, then of course, you won’t say anything about it. As if there
are not plenty of sins to your score without the need of those!” said
Ferdishenko.
</p>

<p>
“But I really don’t know which of my actions is the worst,”
said the lively actress.
</p>

<p>
“Ladies are exempted if they like.”
</p>

<p>
“And how are you to know that one isn’t lying? And if one lies the
whole point of the game is lost,” said Gania.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, but think how delightful to hear how one’s friends lie!
Besides you needn’t be afraid, Gania; everybody knows what your worst
action is without the need of any lying on your part. Only think,
gentlemen,”—and Ferdishenko here grew quite enthusiastic,
“only think with what eyes we shall observe one another tomorrow, after
our tales have been told!”
</p>

<p>
“But surely this is a joke, Nastasia Philipovna?” asked Totski.
“You don’t really mean us to play this game.”
</p>

<p>
“Whoever is afraid of wolves had better not go into the wood,” said
Nastasia, smiling.
</p>

<p>
“But, pardon me, Mr. Ferdishenko, is it possible to make a game out of
this kind of thing?” persisted Totski, growing more and more uneasy.
“I assure you it can’t be a success.”
</p>

<p>
“And why not? Why, the last time I simply told straight off about how I
stole three roubles.”
</p>

<p>
“Perhaps so; but it is hardly possible that you told it so that it seemed
like truth, or so that you were believed. And, as Gavrila Ardalionovitch has
said, the least suggestion of a falsehood takes all point out of the game. It
seems to me that sincerity, on the other hand, is only possible if combined
with a kind of bad taste that would be utterly out of place here.”
</p>

<p>
“How subtle you are, Afanasy Ivanovitch! You astonish me,” cried
Ferdishenko. “You will remark, gentlemen, that in saying that I could not
recount the story of my theft so as to be believed, Afanasy Ivanovitch has very
ingeniously implied that I am not capable of thieving—(it would have been
bad taste to say so openly); and all the time he is probably firmly convinced,
in his own mind, that I am very well capable of it! But now, gentlemen, to
business! Put in your slips, ladies and gentlemen—is yours in, Mr.
Totski? So—then we are all ready; now prince, draw, please.” The
prince silently put his hand into the hat, and drew the names. Ferdishenko was
first, then Ptitsin, then the general, Totski next, his own fifth, then Gania,
and so on; the ladies did not draw.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, dear! oh, dear!” cried Ferdishenko. “I did so hope the
prince would come out first, and then the general. Well, gentlemen, I suppose I
must set a good example! What vexes me much is that I am such an insignificant
creature that it matters nothing to anybody whether I have done bad actions or
not! Besides, which am I to choose? It’s an <i>embarras de richesse</i>.
Shall I tell how I became a thief on one occasion only, to convince Afanasy
Ivanovitch that it is possible to steal without being a thief?”
</p>

<p>
“Do go on, Ferdishenko, and don’t make unnecessary preface, or
you’ll never finish,” said Nastasia Philipovna. All observed how
irritable and cross she had become since her last burst of laughter; but none
the less obstinately did she stick to her absurd whim about this new game.
Totski sat looking miserable enough. The general lingered over his champagne,
and seemed to be thinking of some story for the time when his turn should come.
</p>

<h3>XIV.</h3>

<p>
“I have no wit, Nastasia Philipovna,” began Ferdishenko, “and
therefore I talk too much, perhaps. Were I as witty, now, as Mr. Totski or the
general, I should probably have sat silent all the evening, as they have. Now,
prince, what do you think?—are there not far more thieves than honest men
in this world? Don’t you think we may say there does not exist a single
person so honest that he has never stolen anything whatever in his life?”
</p>

<p>
“What a silly idea,” said the actress. “Of course it is not
the case. I have never stolen anything, for one.”
</p>

<p>
“H’m! very well, Daria Alexeyevna; you have not stolen
anything—agreed. But how about the prince, now—look how he is
blushing!”
</p>

<p>
“I think you are partially right, but you exaggerate,” said the
prince, who had certainly blushed up, of a sudden, for some reason or other.
</p>

<p>
“Ferdishenko—either tell us your story, or be quiet, and mind your
own business. You exhaust all patience,” cuttingly and irritably remarked
Nastasia Philipovna.
</p>

<p>
“Immediately, immediately! As for my story, gentlemen, it is too stupid
and absurd to tell you.
</p>

<p>
“I assure you I am not a thief, and yet I have stolen; I cannot explain
why. It was at Semeon Ivanovitch Ishenka’s country house, one Sunday. He
had a dinner party. After dinner the men stayed at the table over their wine.
It struck me to ask the daughter of the house to play something on the piano;
so I passed through the corner room to join the ladies. In that room, on Maria
Ivanovna’s writing-table, I observed a three-rouble note. She must have
taken it out for some purpose, and left it lying there. There was no one about.
I took up the note and put it in my pocket; why, I can’t say. I
don’t know what possessed me to do it, but it was done, and I went
quickly back to the dining-room and reseated myself at the dinner-table. I sat
and waited there in a great state of excitement. I talked hard, and told lots
of stories, and laughed like mad; then I joined the ladies.
</p>

<p>
“In half an hour or so the loss was discovered, and the servants were
being put under examination. Daria, the housemaid was suspected. I exhibited
the greatest interest and sympathy, and I remember that poor Daria quite lost
her head, and that I began assuring her, before everyone, that I would
guarantee her forgiveness on the part of her mistress, if she would confess her
guilt. They all stared at the girl, and I remember a wonderful attraction in
the reflection that here was I sermonizing away, with the money in my own
pocket all the while. I went and spent the three roubles that very evening at a
restaurant. I went in and asked for a bottle of Lafite, and drank it up; I
wanted to be rid of the money.
</p>

<p>
“I did not feel much remorse either then or afterwards; but I would not
repeat the performance—believe it or not as you please.
There—that’s all.”
</p>

<p>
“Only, of course that’s not nearly your worst action,” said
the actress, with evident dislike in her face.
</p>

<p>
“That was a psychological phenomenon, not an action,” remarked
Totski.
</p>

<p>
“And what about the maid?” asked Nastasia Philipovna, with
undisguised contempt.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, she was turned out next day, of course. It’s a very strict
household, there!”
</p>

<p>
“And you allowed it?”
</p>

<p>
“I should think so, rather! I was not going to return and confess next
day,” laughed Ferdishenko, who seemed a little surprised at the
disagreeable impression which his story had made on all parties.
</p>

<p>
“How mean you were!” said Nastasia.
</p>

<p>
“Bah! you wish to hear a man tell of his worst actions, and you expect
the story to come out goody-goody! One’s worst actions always are mean.
We shall see what the general has to say for himself now. All is not gold that
glitters, you know; and because a man keeps his carriage he need not be
specially virtuous, I assure you, all sorts of people keep carriages. And by
what means?”
</p>

<p>
In a word, Ferdishenko was very angry and rapidly forgetting himself; his whole
face was drawn with passion. Strange as it may appear, he had expected much
better success for his story. These little errors of taste on
Ferdishenko’s part occurred very frequently. Nastasia trembled with rage,
and looked fixedly at him, whereupon he relapsed into alarmed silence. He
realized that he had gone a little too far.
</p>

<p>
“Had we not better end this game?” asked Totski.
</p>

<p>
“It’s my turn, but I plead exemption,” said Ptitsin.
</p>

<p>
“You don’t care to oblige us?” asked Nastasia.
</p>

<p>
“I cannot, I assure you. I confess I do not understand how anyone can
play this game.”
</p>

<p>
“Then, general, it’s your turn,” continued Nastasia
Philipovna, “and if you refuse, the whole game will fall through, which
will disappoint me very much, for I was looking forward to relating a certain
‘page of my own life.’ I am only waiting for you and Afanasy
Ivanovitch to have your turns, for I require the support of your
example,” she added, smiling.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, if you put it in that way,” cried the general, excitedly,
“I’m ready to tell the whole story of my life, but I must confess
that I prepared a little story in anticipation of my turn.”
</p>

<p>
Nastasia smiled amiably at him; but evidently her depression and irritability
were increasing with every moment. Totski was dreadfully alarmed to hear her
promise a revelation out of her own life.
</p>

<p>
“I, like everyone else,” began the general, “have committed
certain not altogether graceful actions, so to speak, during the course of my
life. But the strangest thing of all in my case is, that I should consider the
little anecdote which I am now about to give you as a confession of the worst
of my ‘bad actions.’ It is thirty-five years since it all happened,
and yet I cannot to this very day recall the circumstances without, as it were,
a sudden pang at the heart.
</p>

<p>
“It was a silly affair—I was an ensign at the time. You know
ensigns—their blood is boiling water, their circumstances generally
penurious. Well, I had a servant Nikifor who used to do everything for me in my
quarters, economized and managed for me, and even laid hands on anything he
could find (belonging to other people), in order to augment our household
goods; but a faithful, honest fellow all the same.
</p>

<p>
“I was strict, but just by nature. At that time we were stationed in a
small town. I was quartered at an old widow’s house, a lieutenant’s
widow of eighty years of age. She lived in a wretched little wooden house, and
had not even a servant, so poor was she.
</p>

<p>
“Her relations had all died off—her husband was dead and buried
forty years since; and a niece, who had lived with her and bullied her up to
three years ago, was dead too; so that she was quite alone.
</p>

<p>
“Well, I was precious dull with her, especially as she was so childish
that there was nothing to be got out of her. Eventually, she stole a fowl of
mine; the business is a mystery to this day; but it could have been no one but
herself. I requested to be quartered somewhere else, and was shifted to the
other end of the town, to the house of a merchant with a large family, and a
long beard, as I remember him. Nikifor and I were delighted to go; but the old
lady was not pleased at our departure.
</p>

<p>
“Well, a day or two afterwards, when I returned from drill, Nikifor says
to me: ‘We oughtn’t to have left our tureen with the old lady,
I’ve nothing to serve the soup in.’
</p>

<p>
“I asked how it came about that the tureen had been left. Nikifor
explained that the old lady refused to give it up, because, she said, we had
broken her bowl, and she must have our tureen in place of it; she had declared
that I had so arranged the matter with herself.
</p>

<p>
“This baseness on her part of course aroused my young blood to fever
heat; I jumped up, and away I flew.
</p>

<p>
“I arrived at the old woman’s house beside myself. She was sitting
in a corner all alone, leaning her face on her hand. I fell on her like a clap
of thunder. ‘You old wretch!’ I yelled and all that sort of thing,
in real Russian style. Well, when I began cursing at her, a strange thing
happened. I looked at her, and she stared back with her eyes starting out of
her head, but she did not say a word. She seemed to sway about as she sat, and
looked and looked at me in the strangest way. Well, I soon stopped swearing and
looked closer at her, asked her questions, but not a word could I get out of
her. The flies were buzzing about the room and only this sound broke the
silence; the sun was setting outside; I didn’t know what to make of it,
so I went away.
</p>

<p>
“Before I reached home I was met and summoned to the major’s, so
that it was some while before I actually got there. When I came in, Nikifor met
me. ‘Have you heard, sir, that our old lady is dead?’
‘<i>dead</i>, when?’ ‘Oh, an hour and a half ago.’ That
meant nothing more nor less than that she was dying at the moment when I
pounced on her and began abusing her.
</p>

<p>
“This produced a great effect upon me. I used to dream of the poor old
woman at nights. I really am not superstitious, but two days after, I went to
her funeral, and as time went on I thought more and more about her. I said to
myself, ‘This woman, this human being, lived to a great age. She had
children, a husband and family, friends and relations; her household was busy
and cheerful; she was surrounded by smiling faces; and then suddenly they are
gone, and she is left alone like a solitary fly... like a fly, cursed with the
burden of her age. At last, God calls her to Himself. At sunset, on a lovely
summer’s evening, my little old woman passes away—a thought, you
will notice, which offers much food for reflection—and behold! instead of
tears and prayers to start her on her last journey, she has insults and jeers
from a young ensign, who stands before her with his hands in his pockets,
making a terrible row about a soup tureen!’ Of course I was to blame, and
even now that I have time to look back at it calmly, I pity the poor old thing
no less. I repeat that I wonder at myself, for after all I was not really
responsible. Why did she take it into her head to die at that moment? But the
more I thought of it, the more I felt the weight of it upon my mind; and I
never got quite rid of the impression until I put a couple of old women into an
almshouse and kept them there at my own expense. There, that’s all. I
repeat I dare say I have committed many a grievous sin in my day; but I cannot
help always looking back upon this as the worst action I have ever
perpetrated.”
</p>

<p>
“H’m! and instead of a bad action, your excellency has detailed one
of your noblest deeds,” said Ferdishenko. “Ferdishenko is
‘done.’”
</p>

<p>
“Dear me, general,” said Nastasia Philipovna, absently, “I
really never imagined you had such a good heart.”
</p>

<p>
The general laughed with great satisfaction, and applied himself once more to
the champagne.
</p>

<p>
It was now Totski’s turn, and his story was awaited with great
curiosity—while all eyes turned on Nastasia Philipovna, as though
anticipating that his revelation must be connected somehow with her. Nastasia,
during the whole of his story, pulled at the lace trimming of her sleeve, and
never once glanced at the speaker. Totski was a handsome man, rather stout,
with a very polite and dignified manner. He was always well dressed, and his
linen was exquisite. He had plump white hands, and wore a magnificent diamond
ring on one finger.
</p>

<p>
“What simplifies the duty before me considerably, in my opinion,”
he began, “is that I am bound to recall and relate the very worst action
of my life. In such circumstances there can, of course, be no doubt.
One’s conscience very soon informs one what is the proper narrative to
tell. I admit, that among the many silly and thoughtless actions of my life,
the memory of one comes prominently forward and reminds me that it lay long
like a stone on my heart. Some twenty years since, I paid a visit to Platon
Ordintzeff at his country-house. He had just been elected marshal of the
nobility, and had come there with his young wife for the winter holidays.
Anfisa Alexeyevna’s birthday came off just then, too, and there were two
balls arranged. At that time Dumas-fils’ beautiful work, <i>La Dame aux
Camélias</i>—a novel which I consider imperishable—had just come
into fashion. In the provinces all the ladies were in raptures over it, those
who had read it, at least. Camellias were all the fashion. Everyone inquired
for them, everybody wanted them; and a grand lot of camellias are to be got in
a country town—as you all know—and two balls to provide for!
</p>

<p>
“Poor Peter Volhofskoi was desperately in love with Anfisa Alexeyevna. I
don’t know whether there was anything—I mean I don’t know
whether he could possibly have indulged in any hope. The poor fellow was beside
himself to get her a bouquet of camellias. Countess Sotski and Sophia
Bespalova, as everyone knew, were coming with white camellia bouquets. Anfisa
wished for red ones, for effect. Well, her husband Platon was driven desperate
to find some. And the day before the ball, Anfisa’s rival snapped up the
only red camellias to be had in the place, from under Platon’s nose, and
Platon—wretched man—was done for. Now if Peter had only been able
to step in at this moment with a red bouquet, his little hopes might have made
gigantic strides. A woman’s gratitude under such circumstances would have
been boundless—but it was practically an impossibility.
</p>

<p>
“The night before the ball I met Peter, looking radiant. ‘What is
it?’ I ask. ‘I’ve found them, Eureka!’ ‘No!
where, where?’ ‘At Ekshaisk (a little town fifteen miles off)
there’s a rich old merchant, who keeps a lot of canaries, has no
children, and he and his wife are devoted to flowers. He’s got some
camellias.’ ‘And what if he won’t let you have them?’
‘I’ll go on my knees and implore till I get them. I won’t go
away.’ ‘When shall you start?’ ‘Tomorrow morning at
five o’clock.’ ‘Go on,’ I said, ‘and good luck to
you.’
</p>

<p>
“I was glad for the poor fellow, and went home. But an idea got hold of
me somehow. I don’t know how. It was nearly two in the morning. I rang
the bell and ordered the coachman to be waked up and sent to me. He came. I
gave him a tip of fifteen roubles, and told him to get the carriage ready at
once. In half an hour it was at the door. I got in and off we went.
</p>

<p>
“By five I drew up at the Ekshaisky inn. I waited there till dawn, and
soon after six I was off, and at the old merchant Trepalaf’s.
</p>

<p>
“‘Camellias!’ I said, ‘father, save me, save me, let me
have some camellias!’ He was a tall, grey old man—a
terrible-looking old gentleman. ‘Not a bit of it,’ he says.
‘I won’t.’ Down I went on my knees. ‘Don’t say
so, don’t—think what you’re doing!’ I cried;
‘it’s a matter of life and death!’ ‘If that’s the
case, take them,’ says he. So up I get, and cut such a bouquet of red
camellias! He had a whole greenhouse full of them—lovely ones. The old
fellow sighs. I pull out a hundred roubles. ‘No, no!’ says he,
‘don’t insult me that way.’ ‘Oh, if that’s the
case, give it to the village hospital,’ I say. ‘Ah,’ he says,
‘that’s quite a different matter; that’s good of you and
generous. I’ll pay it in there for you with pleasure.’ I liked that
old fellow, Russian to the core, <i>de la vraie souche</i>. I went home in
raptures, but took another road in order to avoid Peter. Immediately on
arriving I sent up the bouquet for Anfisa to see when she awoke.
</p>

<p>
“You may imagine her ecstasy, her gratitude. The wretched Platon, who had
almost died since yesterday of the reproaches showered upon him, wept on my
shoulder. Of course poor Peter had no chance after this.
</p>

<p>
“I thought he would cut my throat at first, and went about armed ready to
meet him. But he took it differently; he fainted, and had brain fever and
convulsions. A month after, when he had hardly recovered, he went off to the
Crimea, and there he was shot.
</p>

<p>
“I assure you this business left me no peace for many a long year. Why
did I do it? I was not in love with her myself; I’m afraid it was simply
mischief—pure ‘cussedness’ on my part.
</p>

<p>
“If I hadn’t seized that bouquet from under his nose he might have
been alive now, and a happy man. He might have been successful in life, and
never have gone to fight the Turks.”
</p>

<p>
Totski ended his tale with the same dignity that had characterized its
commencement.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia Philipovna’s eyes were flashing in a most unmistakable way, now;
and her lips were all a-quiver by the time Totski finished his story.
</p>

<p>
All present watched both of them with curiosity.
</p>

<p>
“You were right, Totski,” said Nastasia, “it is a dull game
and a stupid one. I’ll just tell my story, as I promised, and then
we’ll play cards.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, but let’s have the story first!” cried the general.
</p>

<p>
“Prince,” said Nastasia Philipovna, unexpectedly turning to
Muishkin, “here are my old friends, Totski and General Epanchin, who wish
to marry me off. Tell me what you think. Shall I marry or not? As you decide,
so shall it be.”
</p>

<p>
Totski grew white as a sheet. The general was struck dumb. All present started
and listened intently. Gania sat rooted to his chair.
</p>

<p>
“Marry whom?” asked the prince, faintly.
</p>

<p>
“Gavrila Ardalionovitch Ivolgin,” said Nastasia, firmly and evenly.
</p>

<p>
There were a few seconds of dead silence.
</p>

<p>
The prince tried to speak, but could not form his words; a great weight seemed
to lie upon his breast and suffocate him.
</p>

<p>
“N-no! don’t marry him!” he whispered at last, drawing his
breath with an effort.
</p>

<p>
“So be it, then. Gavrila Ardalionovitch,” she spoke solemnly and
forcibly, “you hear the prince’s decision? Take it as my decision;
and let that be the end of the matter for good and all.”
</p>

<p>
“Nastasia Philipovna!” cried Totski, in a quaking voice.
</p>

<p>
“Nastasia Philipovna!” said the general, in persuasive but agitated
tones.
</p>

<p>
Everyone in the room fidgeted in their places, and waited to see what was
coming next.
</p>

<p>
“Well, gentlemen!” she continued, gazing around in apparent
astonishment; “what do you all look so alarmed about? Why are you so
upset?”
</p>

<p>
“But—recollect, Nastasia Philipovna,” stammered Totski,
“you gave a promise, quite a free one, and—and you might have
spared us this. I am confused and bewildered, I know; but, in a word, at such a
moment, and before company, and all so-so-irregular, finishing off a game with
a serious matter like this, a matter of honour, and of heart, and—”
</p>

<p>
“I don’t follow you, Afanasy Ivanovitch; you are losing your head.
In the first place, what do you mean by ‘before company’?
Isn’t the company good enough for you? And what’s all that about
‘a game’? I wished to tell my little story, and I told it!
Don’t you like it? You heard what I said to the prince? ‘As you
decide, so it shall be!’ If he had said ‘yes,’ I should have
given my consent! But he said ‘no,’ so I refused. Here was my whole
life hanging on his one word! Surely I was serious enough?”
</p>

<p>
“The prince! What on earth has the prince got to do with it? Who the
deuce is the prince?” cried the general, who could conceal his wrath no
longer.
</p>

<p>
“The prince has this to do with it—that I see in him for the first
time in all my life, a man endowed with real truthfulness of spirit, and I
trust him. He trusted me at first sight, and I trust him!”
</p>

<p>
“It only remains for me, then, to thank Nastasia Philipovna for the great
delicacy with which she has treated me,” said Gania, as pale as death,
and with quivering lips. “That is my plain duty, of course; but the
prince—what has he to do in the matter?”
</p>

<p>
“I see what you are driving at,” said Nastasia Philipovna.
“You imply that the prince is after the seventy-five thousand
roubles—I quite understand you. Mr. Totski, I forgot to say, ‘Take
your seventy-five thousand roubles’—I don’t want them. I let
you go free for nothing—take your freedom! You must need it. Nine years
and three months’ captivity is enough for anybody. Tomorrow I shall start
afresh—today I am a free agent for the first time in my life.
</p>

<p>
“General, you must take your pearls back, too—give them to your
wife—here they are! Tomorrow I shall leave this flat altogether, and then
there’ll be no more of these pleasant little social gatherings, ladies
and gentlemen.”
</p>

<p>
So saying, she scornfully rose from her seat as though to depart.
</p>

<p>
“Nastasia Philipovna! Nastasia Philipovna!”
</p>

<p>
The words burst involuntarily from every mouth. All present started up in
bewildered excitement; all surrounded her; all had listened uneasily to her
wild, disconnected sentences. All felt that something had happened, something
had gone very far wrong indeed, but no one could make head or tail of the
matter.
</p>

<p>
At this moment there was a furious ring at the bell, and a great knock at the
door—exactly similar to the one which had startled the company at
Gania’s house in the afternoon.
</p>

<p>
“Ah, ah! here’s the climax at last, at half-past twelve!”
cried Nastasia Philipovna. “Sit down, gentlemen, I beg you. Something is
about to happen.”
</p>

<p>
So saying, she reseated herself; a strange smile played on her lips. She sat
quite still, but watched the door in a fever of impatience.
</p>

<p>
“Rogojin and his hundred thousand roubles, no doubt of it,”
muttered Ptitsin to himself.
</p>

<h3>XV.</h3>

<p>
Katia, the maid-servant, made her appearance, terribly frightened.
</p>

<p>
“Goodness knows what it means, ma’am,” she said. “There
is a whole collection of men come—all tipsy—and want to see you.
They say that ‘it’s Rogojin, and she knows all about
it.’”
</p>

<p>
“It’s all right, Katia, let them all in at once.”
</p>

<p>
“Surely not <i>all</i>, ma’am? They seem so
disorderly—it’s dreadful to see them.”
</p>

<p>
“Yes <i>all</i>, Katia, all—every one of them. Let them in, or
they’ll come in whether you like or no. Listen! what a noise they are
making! Perhaps you are offended, gentlemen, that I should receive such guests
in your presence? I am very sorry, and ask your forgiveness, but it cannot be
helped—and I should be very grateful if you could all stay and witness
this climax. However, just as you please, of course.”
</p>

<p>
The guests exchanged glances; they were annoyed and bewildered by the episode;
but it was clear enough that all this had been pre-arranged and expected by
Nastasia Philipovna, and that there was no use in trying to stop her
now—for she was little short of insane.
</p>

<p>
Besides, they were naturally inquisitive to see what was to happen. There was
nobody who would be likely to feel much alarm. There were but two ladies
present; one of whom was the lively actress, who was not easily frightened, and
the other the silent German beauty who, it turned out, did not understand a
word of Russian, and seemed to be as stupid as she was lovely.
</p>

<p>
Her acquaintances invited her to their “At Homes” because she was
so decorative. She was exhibited to their guests like a valuable picture, or
vase, or statue, or firescreen. As for the men, Ptitsin was one of
Rogojin’s friends; Ferdishenko was as much at home as a fish in the sea,
Gania, not yet recovered from his amazement, appeared to be chained to a
pillory. The old professor did not in the least understand what was happening;
but when he noticed how extremely agitated the mistress of the house, and her
friends, seemed, he nearly wept, and trembled with fright: but he would rather
have died than leave Nastasia Philipovna at such a crisis, for he loved her as
if she were his own granddaughter. Afanasy Ivanovitch greatly disliked having
anything to do with the affair, but he was too much interested to leave, in
spite of the mad turn things had taken; and a few words that had dropped from
the lips of Nastasia puzzled him so much, that he felt he could not go without
an explanation. He resolved therefore, to see it out, and to adopt the attitude
of silent spectator, as most suited to his dignity. General Epanchin alone
determined to depart. He was annoyed at the manner in which his gift had been
returned, as though he had condescended, under the influence of passion, to
place himself on a level with Ptitsin and Ferdishenko, his self-respect and
sense of duty now returned together with a consciousness of what was due to his
social rank and official importance. In short, he plainly showed his conviction
that a man in his position could have nothing to do with Rogojin and his
companions. But Nastasia interrupted him at his first words.
</p>

<p>
“Ah, general!” she cried, “I was forgetting! If I had only
foreseen this unpleasantness! I won’t insist on keeping you against your
will, although I should have liked you to be beside me now. In any case, I am
most grateful to you for your visit, and flattering attention... but if you are
afraid...”
</p>

<p>
“Excuse me, Nastasia Philipovna,” interrupted the general, with
chivalric generosity. “To whom are you speaking? I have remained until
now simply because of my devotion to you, and as for danger, I am only afraid
that the carpets may be ruined, and the furniture smashed!... You should shut
the door on the lot, in my opinion. But I confess that I am extremely curious
to see how it ends.”
</p>

<p>
“Rogojin!” announced Ferdishenko.
</p>

<p>
“What do you think about it?” said the general in a low voice to
Totski. “Is she mad? I mean mad in the medical sense of the word ....
eh?”
</p>

<p>
“I’ve always said she was predisposed to it,” whispered
Afanasy Ivanovitch slyly. “Perhaps it is a fever!”
</p>

<p>
Since their visit to Gania’s home, Rogojin’s followers had been
increased by two new recruits—a dissolute old man, the hero of some
ancient scandal, and a retired sub-lieutenant. A laughable story was told of
the former. He possessed, it was said, a set of false teeth, and one day when
he wanted money for a drinking orgy, he pawned them, and was never able to
reclaim them! The officer appeared to be a rival of the gentleman who was so
proud of his fists. He was known to none of Rogojin’s followers, but as
they passed by the Nevsky, where he stood begging, he had joined their ranks.
His claim for the charity he desired seemed based on the fact that in the days
of his prosperity he had given away as much as fifteen roubles at a time. The
rivals seemed more than a little jealous of one another. The athlete appeared
injured at the admission of the “beggar” into the company. By
nature taciturn, he now merely growled occasionally like a bear, and glared
contemptuously upon the “beggar,” who, being somewhat of a man of
the world, and a diplomatist, tried to insinuate himself into the bear’s
good graces. He was a much smaller man than the athlete, and doubtless was
conscious that he must tread warily. Gently and without argument he alluded to
the advantages of the English style in boxing, and showed himself a firm
believer in Western institutions. The athlete’s lips curled disdainfully,
and without honouring his adversary with a formal denial, he exhibited, as if
by accident, that peculiarly Russian object—an enormous fist, clenched,
muscular, and covered with red hairs! The sight of this pre-eminently national
attribute was enough to convince anybody, without words, that it was a serious
matter for those who should happen to come into contact with it.
</p>

<p>
None of the band were very drunk, for the leader had kept his intended visit to
Nastasia in view all day, and had done his best to prevent his followers from
drinking too much. He was sober himself, but the excitement of this chaotic
day—the strangest day of his life—had affected him so that he was
in a dazed, wild condition, which almost resembled drunkenness.
</p>

<p>
He had kept but one idea before him all day, and for that he had worked in an
agony of anxiety and a fever of suspense. His lieutenants had worked so hard
from five o’clock until eleven, that they actually had collected a
hundred thousand roubles for him, but at such terrific expense, that the rate
of interest was only mentioned among them in whispers and with bated breath.
</p>

<p>
As before, Rogojin walked in advance of his troop, who followed him with
mingled self-assertion and timidity. They were specially frightened of Nastasia
Philipovna herself, for some reason.
</p>

<p>
Many of them expected to be thrown downstairs at once, without further
ceremony, the elegant and irresistible Zaleshoff among them. But the party led
by the athlete, without openly showing their hostile intentions, silently
nursed contempt and even hatred for Nastasia Philipovna, and marched into her
house as they would have marched into an enemy’s fortress. Arrived there,
the luxury of the rooms seemed to inspire them with a kind of respect, not
unmixed with alarm. So many things were entirely new to their
experience—the choice furniture, the pictures, the great statue of Venus.
They followed their chief into the salon, however, with a kind of impudent
curiosity. There, the sight of General Epanchin among the guests, caused many
of them to beat a hasty retreat into the adjoining room, the
“boxer” and “beggar” being among the first to go. A few
only, of whom Lebedeff made one, stood their ground; he had contrived to walk
side by side with Rogojin, for he quite understood the importance of a man who
had a fortune of a million odd roubles, and who at this moment carried a
hundred thousand in his hand. It may be added that the whole company, not
excepting Lebedeff, had the vaguest idea of the extent of their powers, and of
how far they could safely go. At some moments Lebedeff was sure that right was
on their side; at others he tried uneasily to remember various cheering and
reassuring articles of the Civil Code.
</p>

<p>
Rogojin, when he stepped into the room, and his eyes fell upon Nastasia,
stopped short, grew white as a sheet, and stood staring; it was clear that his
heart was beating painfully. So he stood, gazing intently, but timidly, for a
few seconds. Suddenly, as though bereft of his senses, he moved forward,
staggering helplessly, towards the table. On his way he collided against
Ptitsin’s chair, and put his dirty foot on the lace skirt of the silent
lady’s dress; but he neither apologized for this, nor even noticed it.
</p>

<p>
On reaching the table, he placed upon it a strange-looking object, which he had
carried with him into the drawing-room. This was a paper packet, some six or
seven inches thick, and eight or nine in length, wrapped in an old newspaper,
and tied round three or four times with string.
</p>

<p>
Having placed this before her, he stood with drooped arms and head, as though
awaiting his sentence.
</p>

<p>
His costume was the same as it had been in the morning, except for a new silk
handkerchief round his neck, bright green and red, fastened with a huge diamond
pin, and an enormous diamond ring on his dirty forefinger.
</p>

<p>
Lebedeff stood two or three paces behind his chief; and the rest of the band
waited about near the door.
</p>

<p>
The two maid-servants were both peeping in, frightened and amazed at this
unusual and disorderly scene.
</p>

<p>
“What is that?” asked Nastasia Philipovna, gazing intently at
Rogojin, and indicating the paper packet.
</p>

<p>
“A hundred thousand,” replied the latter, almost in a whisper.
</p>

<p>
“Oh! so he kept his word—there’s a man for you! Well, sit
down, please—take that chair. I shall have something to say to you
presently. Who are all these with you? The same party? Let them come in and sit
down. There’s room on that sofa, there are some chairs and there’s
another sofa! Well, why don’t they sit down?”
</p>

<p>
Sure enough, some of the brave fellows entirely lost their heads at this point,
and retreated into the next room. Others, however, took the hint and sat down,
as far as they could from the table, however; feeling braver in proportion to
their distance from Nastasia.
</p>

<p>
Rogojin took the chair offered him, but he did not sit long; he soon stood up
again, and did not reseat himself. Little by little he began to look around him
and discern the other guests. Seeing Gania, he smiled venomously and muttered
to himself, “Look at that!”
</p>

<p>
He gazed at Totski and the general with no apparent confusion, and with very
little curiosity. But when he observed that the prince was seated beside
Nastasia Philipovna, he could not take his eyes off him for a long while, and
was clearly amazed. He could not account for the prince’s presence there.
It was not in the least surprising that Rogojin should be, at this time, in a
more or less delirious condition; for not to speak of the excitements of the
day, he had spent the night before in the train, and had not slept more than a
wink for forty-eight hours.
</p>

<p>
“This, gentlemen, is a hundred thousand roubles,” said Nastasia
Philipovna, addressing the company in general, “here, in this dirty
parcel. This afternoon Rogojin yelled, like a madman, that he would bring me a
hundred thousand in the evening, and I have been waiting for him all the while.
He was bargaining for me, you know; first he offered me eighteen thousand; then
he rose to forty, and then to a hundred thousand. And he has kept his word,
see! My goodness, how white he is! All this happened this afternoon, at
Gania’s. I had gone to pay his mother a visit—my future family, you
know! And his sister said to my very face, surely somebody will turn this
shameless creature out. After which she spat in her brother Gania’s
face—a girl of character, that!”
</p>

<p>
“Nastasia Philipovna!” began the general, reproachfully. He was
beginning to put his own interpretation on the affair.
</p>

<p>
“Well, what, general? Not quite good form, eh? Oh, nonsense! Here have I
been sitting in my box at the French theatre for the last five years like a
statue of inaccessible virtue, and kept out of the way of all admirers, like a
silly little idiot! Now, there’s this man, who comes and pays down his
hundred thousand on the table, before you all, in spite of my five years of
innocence and proud virtue, and I dare be sworn he has his sledge outside
waiting to carry me off. He values me at a hundred thousand! I see you are
still angry with me, Gania! Why, surely you never really wished to take
<i>me</i> into your family? <i>me</i>, Rogojin’s mistress! What did the
prince say just now?”
</p>

<p>
“I never said you were Rogojin’s mistress—you are
<i>not!</i>” said the prince, in trembling accents.
</p>

<p>
“Nastasia Philipovna, dear soul!” cried the actress, impatiently,
“do be calm, dear! If it annoys you so—all this—do go away
and rest! Of course you would never go with this wretched fellow, in spite of
his hundred thousand roubles! Take his money and kick him out of the house;
that’s the way to treat him and the likes of him! Upon my word, if it
were my business, I’d soon clear them all out!”
</p>

<p>
The actress was a kind-hearted woman, and highly impressionable. She was very
angry now.
</p>

<p>
“Don’t be cross, Daria Alexeyevna!” laughed Nastasia.
“I was not angry when I spoke; I wasn’t reproaching Gania. I
don’t know how it was that I ever could have indulged the whim of
entering an honest family like his. I saw his mother—and kissed her hand,
too. I came and stirred up all that fuss, Gania, this afternoon, on purpose to
see how much you could swallow—you surprised me, my friend—you did,
indeed. Surely you could not marry a woman who accepts pearls like those you
knew the general was going to give me, on the very eve of her marriage? And
Rogojin! Why, in your own house and before your own brother and sister, he
bargained with me! Yet you could come here and expect to be betrothed to me
before you left the house! You almost brought your sister, too. Surely what
Rogojin said about you is not really true: that you would crawl all the way to
the other end of the town, on hands and knees, for three roubles?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, he would!” said Rogojin, quietly, but with an air of absolute
conviction.
</p>

<p>
“H’m! and he receives a good salary, I’m told. Well, what
should you get but disgrace and misery if you took a wife you hated into your
family (for I know very well that you do hate me)? No, no! I believe now that a
man like you would murder anyone for money—sharpen a razor and come up
behind his best friend and cut his throat like a sheep—I’ve read of
such people. Everyone seems money-mad nowadays. No, no! I may be shameless, but
you are far worse. I don’t say a word about that other—”
</p>

<p>
“Nastasia Philipovna, is this really you? You, once so refined and
delicate of speech. Oh, what a tongue! What dreadful things you are
saying,” cried the general, wringing his hands in real grief.
</p>

<p>
“I am intoxicated, general. I am having a day out, you
know—it’s my birthday! I have long looked forward to this happy
occasion. Daria Alexeyevna, you see that nosegay-man, that Monsieur aux
Camelias, sitting there laughing at us?”
</p>

<p>
“I am not laughing, Nastasia Philipovna; I am only listening with all my
attention,” said Totski, with dignity.
</p>

<p>
“Well, why have I worried him, for five years, and never let him go free?
Is he worth it? He is only just what he ought to be—nothing particular.
He thinks I am to blame, too. He gave me my education, kept me like a countess.
Money—my word! What a lot of money he spent over me! And he tried to find
me an honest husband first, and then this Gania, here. And what do you think?
All these five years I did not live with him, and yet I took his money, and
considered I was quite justified.
</p>

<p>
“You say, take the hundred thousand and kick that man out. It is true, it
is an abominable business, as you say. I might have married long ago, not
Gania—Oh, no!—but that would have been abominable too.
</p>

<p>
“Would you believe it, I had some thoughts of marrying Totski, four years
ago! I meant mischief, I confess—but I could have had him, I give you my
word; he asked me himself. But I thought, no! it’s not worthwhile to take
such advantage of him. No! I had better go on to the streets, or accept
Rogojin, or become a washerwoman or something—for I have nothing of my
own, you know. I shall go away and leave everything behind, to the last
rag—he shall have it all back. And who would take me without anything?
Ask Gania, there, whether he would. Why, even Ferdishenko wouldn’t have
me!”
</p>

<p>
“No, Ferdishenko would not; he is a candid fellow, Nastasia
Philipovna,” said that worthy. “But the prince would. You sit here
making complaints, but just look at the prince. I’ve been observing him
for a long while.”
</p>

<p>
Nastasia Philipovna looked keenly round at the prince.
</p>

<p>
“Is that true?” she asked.
</p>

<p>
“Quite true,” whispered the prince.
</p>

<p>
“You’ll take me as I am, with nothing?”
</p>

<p>
“I will, Nastasia Philipovna.”
</p>

<p>
“Here’s a pretty business!” cried the general.
“However, it might have been expected of him.”
</p>

<p>
The prince continued to regard Nastasia with a sorrowful, but intent and
piercing, gaze.
</p>

<p>
“Here’s another alternative for me,” said Nastasia, turning
once more to the actress; “and he does it out of pure kindness of heart.
I know him. I’ve found a benefactor. Perhaps, though, what they say about
him may be true—that he’s an—we know what. And what shall you
live on, if you are really so madly in love with Rogojin’s mistress, that
you are ready to marry her—eh?”
</p>

<p>
“I take you as a good, honest woman, Nastasia Philipovna—not as
Rogojin’s mistress.”
</p>

<p>
“Who? I?—good and honest?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, you.”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, you get those ideas out of novels, you know. Times are changed now,
dear prince; the world sees things as they really are. That’s all
nonsense. Besides, how can you marry? You need a nurse, not a wife.”
</p>

<p>
The prince rose and began to speak in a trembling, timid tone, but with the air
of a man absolutely sure of the truth of his words.
</p>

<p>
“I know nothing, Nastasia Philipovna. I have seen nothing. You are right
so far; but I consider that you would be honouring me, and not I you. I am a
nobody. You have suffered, you have passed through hell and emerged pure, and
that is very much. Why do you shame yourself by desiring to go with Rogojin?
You are delirious. You have returned to Mr. Totski his seventy-five thousand
roubles, and declared that you will leave this house and all that is in it,
which is a line of conduct that not one person here would imitate. Nastasia
Philipovna, I love you! I would die for you. I shall never let any man say one
word against you, Nastasia Philipovna! and if we are poor, I can work for
both.”
</p>

<p>
As the prince spoke these last words a titter was heard from Ferdishenko;
Lebedeff laughed too. The general grunted with irritation; Ptitsin and Totski
barely restrained their smiles. The rest all sat listening, open-mouthed with
wonder.
</p>

<p>
“But perhaps we shall not be poor; we may be very rich, Nastasia
Philipovna,” continued the prince, in the same timid, quivering tones.
“I don’t know for certain, and I’m sorry to say I
haven’t had an opportunity of finding out all day; but I received a
letter from Moscow, while I was in Switzerland, from a Mr. Salaskin, and he
acquaints me with the fact that I am entitled to a very large inheritance. This
letter—”
</p>

<p>
The prince pulled a letter out of his pocket.
</p>

<p>
“Is he raving?” said the general. “Are we really in a
mad-house?”
</p>

<p>
There was silence for a moment. Then Ptitsin spoke.
</p>

<p>
“I think you said, prince, that your letter was from Salaskin? Salaskin
is a very eminent man, indeed, in his own world; he is a wonderfully clever
solicitor, and if he really tells you this, I think you may be pretty sure that
he is right. It so happens, luckily, that I know his handwriting, for I have
lately had business with him. If you would allow me to see it, I should perhaps
be able to tell you.”
</p>

<p>
The prince held out the letter silently, but with a shaking hand.
</p>

<p>
“What, what?” said the general, much agitated.
</p>

<p>
“What’s all this? Is he really heir to anything?”
</p>

<p>
All present concentrated their attention upon Ptitsin, reading the
prince’s letter. The general curiosity had received a new fillip.
Ferdishenko could not sit still. Rogojin fixed his eyes first on the prince,
and then on Ptitsin, and then back again; he was extremely agitated. Lebedeff
could not stand it. He crept up and read over Ptitsin’s shoulder, with
the air of a naughty boy who expects a box on the ear every moment for his
indiscretion.
</p>

<h3>XVI.</h3>

<p>
“It’s good business,” said Ptitsin, at last, folding the
letter and handing it back to the prince. “You will receive, without the
slightest trouble, by the last will and testament of your aunt, a very large
sum of money indeed.”
</p>

<p>
“Impossible!” cried the general, starting up as if he had been
shot.
</p>

<p>
Ptitsin explained, for the benefit of the company, that the prince’s aunt
had died five months since. He had never known her, but she was his
mother’s own sister, the daughter of a Moscow merchant, one Paparchin,
who had died a bankrupt. But the elder brother of this same Paparchin, had been
an eminent and very rich merchant. A year since it had so happened that his
only two sons had both died within the same month. This sad event had so
affected the old man that he, too, had died very shortly after. He was a
widower, and had no relations left, excepting the prince’s aunt, a poor
woman living on charity, who was herself at the point of death from dropsy; but
who had time, before she died, to set Salaskin to work to find her nephew, and
to make her will bequeathing her newly-acquired fortune to him.
</p>

<p>
It appeared that neither the prince, nor the doctor with whom he lived in
Switzerland, had thought of waiting for further communications; but the prince
had started straight away with Salaskin’s letter in his pocket.
</p>

<p>
“One thing I may tell you, for certain,” concluded Ptitsin,
addressing the prince, “that there is no question about the authenticity
of this matter. Anything that Salaskin writes you as regards your
unquestionable right to this inheritance, you may look upon as so much money in
your pocket. I congratulate you, prince; you may receive a million and a half
of roubles, perhaps more; I don’t know. All I <i>do</i> know is that
Paparchin was a very rich merchant indeed.”
</p>

<p>
“Hurrah!” cried Lebedeff, in a drunken voice. “Hurrah for the
last of the Muishkins!”
</p>

<p>
“My goodness me! and I gave him twenty-five roubles this morning as
though he were a beggar,” blurted out the general, half senseless with
amazement. “Well, I congratulate you, I congratulate you!” And the
general rose from his seat and solemnly embraced the prince. All came forward
with congratulations; even those of Rogojin’s party who had retreated
into the next room, now crept softly back to look on. For the moment even
Nastasia Philipovna was forgotten.
</p>

<p>
But gradually the consciousness crept back into the minds of each one present
that the prince had just made her an offer of marriage. The situation had,
therefore, become three times as fantastic as before.
</p>

<p>
Totski sat and shrugged his shoulders, bewildered. He was the only guest left
sitting at this time; the others had thronged round the table in disorder, and
were all talking at once.
</p>

<p>
It was generally agreed, afterwards, in recalling that evening, that from this
moment Nastasia Philipovna seemed entirely to lose her senses. She continued to
sit still in her place, looking around at her guests with a strange, bewildered
expression, as though she were trying to collect her thoughts, and could not.
Then she suddenly turned to the prince, and glared at him with frowning brows;
but this only lasted one moment. Perhaps it suddenly struck her that all this
was a jest, but his face seemed to reassure her. She reflected, and smiled
again, vaguely.
</p>

<p>
“So I am really a princess,” she whispered to herself, ironically,
and glancing accidentally at Daria Alexeyevna’s face, she burst out
laughing.
</p>

<p>
“Ha, ha, ha!” she cried, “this is an unexpected climax, after
all. I didn’t expect this. What are you all standing up for, gentlemen?
Sit down; congratulate me and the prince! Ferdishenko, just step out and order
some more champagne, will you? Katia, Pasha,” she added suddenly, seeing
the servants at the door, “come here! I’m going to be married, did
you hear? To the prince. He has a million and a half of roubles; he is Prince
Muishkin, and has asked me to marry him. Here, prince, come and sit by me; and
here comes the wine. Now then, ladies and gentlemen, where are your
congratulations?”
</p>

<p>
“Hurrah!” cried a number of voices. A rush was made for the wine by
Rogojin’s followers, though, even among them, there seemed some sort of
realization that the situation had changed. Rogojin stood and looked on, with
an incredulous smile, screwing up one side of his mouth.
</p>

<p>
“Prince, my dear fellow, do remember what you are about,” said the
general, approaching Muishkin, and pulling him by the coat sleeve.
</p>

<p>
Nastasia Philipovna overheard the remark, and burst out laughing.
</p>

<p>
“No, no, general!” she cried. “You had better look out! I am
the princess now, you know. The prince won’t let you insult me. Afanasy
Ivanovitch, why don’t you congratulate me? I shall be able to sit at
table with your new wife, now. Aha! you see what I gain by marrying a prince! A
million and a half, and a prince, and an idiot into the bargain, they say. What
better could I wish for? Life is only just about to commence for me in earnest.
Rogojin, you are a little too late. Away with your paper parcel! I’m
going to marry the prince; I’m richer than you are now.”
</p>

<p>
But Rogojin understood how things were tending, at last. An inexpressibly
painful expression came over his face. He wrung his hands; a groan made its way
up from the depths of his soul.
</p>

<p>
“Surrender her, for God’s sake!” he said to the prince.
</p>

<p>
All around burst out laughing.
</p>

<p>
“What? Surrender her to <i>you?</i>” cried Daria Alexeyevna.
“To a fellow who comes and bargains for a wife like a moujik! The prince
wishes to marry her, and you—”
</p>

<p>
“So do I, so do I! This moment, if I could! I’d give every farthing
I have to do it.”
</p>

<p>
“You drunken moujik,” said Daria Alexeyevna, once more. “You
ought to be kicked out of the place.”
</p>

<p>
The laughter became louder than ever.
</p>

<p>
“Do you hear, prince?” said Nastasia Philipovna. “Do you hear
how this moujik of a fellow goes on bargaining for your bride?”
</p>

<p>
“He is drunk,” said the prince, quietly, “and he loves you
very much.”
</p>

<p>
“Won’t you be ashamed, afterwards, to reflect that your wife very
nearly ran away with Rogojin?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, you were raving, you were in a fever; you are still half
delirious.”
</p>

<p>
“And won’t you be ashamed when they tell you, afterwards, that your
wife lived at Totski’s expense so many years?”
</p>

<p>
“No; I shall not be ashamed of that. You did not so live by your own
will.”
</p>

<p>
“And you’ll never reproach me with it?”
</p>

<p>
“Never.”
</p>

<p>
“Take care, don’t commit yourself for a whole lifetime.”
</p>

<p>
“Nastasia Philipovna.” said the prince, quietly, and with deep
emotion, “I said before that I shall esteem your consent to be my wife as
a great honour to myself, and shall consider that it is you who will honour me,
not I you, by our marriage. You laughed at these words, and others around us
laughed as well; I heard them. Very likely I expressed myself funnily, and I
may have looked funny, but, for all that, I believe I understand where honour
lies, and what I said was but the literal truth. You were about to ruin
yourself just now, irrevocably; you would never have forgiven yourself for so
doing afterwards; and yet, you are absolutely blameless. It is impossible that
your life should be altogether ruined at your age. What matter that Rogojin
came bargaining here, and that Gavrila Ardalionovitch would have deceived you
if he could? Why do you continually remind us of these facts? I assure you once
more that very few could find it in them to act as you have acted this day. As
for your wish to go with Rogojin, that was simply the idea of a delirious and
suffering brain. You are still quite feverish; you ought to be in bed, not
here. You know quite well that if you had gone with Rogojin, you would have
become a washer-woman next day, rather than stay with him. You are proud,
Nastasia Philipovna, and perhaps you have really suffered so much that you
imagine yourself to be a desperately guilty woman. You require a great deal of
petting and looking after, Nastasia Philipovna, and I will do this. I saw your
portrait this morning, and it seemed quite a familiar face to me; it seemed to
me that the portrait-face was calling to me for help. I—I shall respect
you all my life, Nastasia Philipovna,” concluded the prince, as though
suddenly recollecting himself, and blushing to think of the sort of company
before whom he had said all this.
</p>

<p>
Ptitsin bowed his head and looked at the ground, overcome by a mixture of
feelings. Totski muttered to himself: “He may be an idiot, but he knows
that flattery is the best road to success here.”
</p>

<p>
The prince observed Gania’s eyes flashing at him, as though they would
gladly annihilate him then and there.
</p>

<p>
“That’s a kind-hearted man, if you like,” said Daria
Alexeyevna, whose wrath was quickly evaporating.
</p>

<p>
“A refined man, but—lost,” murmured the general.
</p>

<p>
Totski took his hat and rose to go. He and the general exchanged glances,
making a private arrangement, thereby, to leave the house together.
</p>

<p>
“Thank you, prince; no one has ever spoken to me like that before,”
began Nastasia Philipovna. “Men have always bargained for me, before
this; and not a single respectable man has ever proposed to marry me. Do you
hear, Afanasy Ivanovitch? What do <i>you</i> think of what the prince has just
been saying? It was almost immodest, wasn’t it? You, Rogojin, wait a
moment, don’t go yet! I see you don’t intend to move however.
Perhaps I may go with you yet. Where did you mean to take me to?”
</p>

<p>
“To Ekaterinhof,” replied Lebedeff. Rogojin simply stood staring,
with trembling lips, not daring to believe his ears. He was stunned, as though
from a blow on the head.
</p>

<p>
“What are you thinking of, my dear Nastasia?” said Daria Alexeyevna
in alarm. “What are you saying?” “You are not going mad, are
you?”
</p>

<p>
Nastasia Philipovna burst out laughing and jumped up from the sofa.
</p>

<p>
“You thought I should accept this good child’s invitation to ruin
him, did you?” she cried. “That’s Totski’s way, not
mine. He’s fond of children. Come along, Rogojin, get your money ready!
We won’t talk about marrying just at this moment, but let’s see the
money at all events. Come! I may not marry you, either. I don’t know. I
suppose you thought you’d keep the money, if I did! Ha, ha, ha! nonsense!
I have no sense of shame left. I tell you I have been Totski’s concubine.
Prince, you must marry Aglaya Ivanovna, not Nastasia Philipovna, or this fellow
Ferdishenko will always be pointing the finger of scorn at you. You
aren’t afraid, I know; but I should always be afraid that I had ruined
you, and that you would reproach me for it. As for what you say about my doing
you honour by marrying you—well, Totski can tell you all about that. You
had your eye on Aglaya, Gania, you know you had; and you might have married her
if you had not come bargaining. You are all like this. You should choose, once
for all, between disreputable women, and respectable ones, or you are sure to
get mixed. Look at the general, how he’s staring at me!”
</p>

<p>
“This is too horrible,” said the general, starting to his feet. All
were standing up now. Nastasia was absolutely beside herself.
</p>

<p>
“I am very proud, in spite of what I am,” she continued. “You
called me ‘perfection’ just now, prince. A nice sort of perfection
to throw up a prince and a million and a half of roubles in order to be able to
boast of the fact afterwards! What sort of a wife should I make for you, after
all I have said? Afanasy Ivanovitch, do you observe I have really and truly
thrown away a million of roubles? And you thought that I should consider your
wretched seventy-five thousand, with Gania thrown in for a husband, a paradise
of bliss! Take your seventy-five thousand back, sir; you did not reach the
hundred thousand. Rogojin cut a better dash than you did. I’ll console
Gania myself; I have an idea about that. But now I must be off! I’ve been
in prison for ten years. I’m free at last! Well, Rogojin, what are you
waiting for? Let’s get ready and go.”
</p>

<p>
“Come along!” shouted Rogojin, beside himself with joy. “Hey!
all of you fellows! Wine! Round with it! Fill the glasses!”
</p>

<p>
“Get away!” he shouted frantically, observing that Daria Alexeyevna
was approaching to protest against Nastasia’s conduct. “Get away,
she’s mine, everything’s mine! She’s a queen, get
away!”
</p>

<p>
He was panting with ecstasy. He walked round and round Nastasia Philipovna and
told everybody to “keep their distance.”
</p>

<p>
All the Rogojin company were now collected in the drawing-room; some were
drinking, some laughed and talked: all were in the highest and wildest spirits.
Ferdishenko was doing his best to unite himself to them; the general and Totski
again made an attempt to go. Gania, too stood hat in hand ready to go; but
seemed to be unable to tear his eyes away from the scene before him.
</p>

<p>
“Get out, keep your distance!” shouted Rogojin.
</p>

<p>
“What are you shouting about there!” cried Nastasia
“I’m not yours yet. I may kick you out for all you know I
haven’t taken your money yet; there it all is on the table. Here, give me
over that packet! Is there a hundred thousand roubles in that one packet? Pfu!
what abominable stuff it looks! Oh! nonsense, Daria Alexeyevna; you surely did
not expect me to ruin <i>him?</i>” (indicating the prince). “Fancy
him nursing me! Why, he needs a nurse himself! The general, there, will be his
nurse now, you’ll see. Here, prince, look here! Your bride is accepting
money. What a disreputable woman she must be! And you wished to marry her! What
are you crying about? Is it a bitter dose? Never mind, you shall laugh yet.
Trust to time.” (In spite of these words there were two large tears
rolling down Nastasia’s own cheeks.) “It’s far better to
think twice of it now than afterwards. Oh! you mustn’t cry like that!
There’s Katia crying, too. What is it, Katia, dear? I shall leave you and
Pasha a lot of things, I’ve laid them out for you already; but good-bye,
now. I made an honest girl like you serve a low woman like myself. It’s
better so, prince, it is indeed. You’d begin to despise me
afterwards—we should never be happy. Oh! you needn’t swear, prince,
I shan’t believe you, you know. How foolish it would be, too! No, no;
we’d better say good-bye and part friends. I am a bit of a dreamer
myself, and I used to dream of you once. Very often during those five years
down at his estate I used to dream and think, and I always imagined just such a
good, honest, foolish fellow as you, one who should come and say to me:
‘You are an innocent woman, Nastasia Philipovna, and I adore you.’
I dreamt of you often. I used to think so much down there that I nearly went
mad; and then this fellow here would come down. He would stay a couple of
months out of the twelve, and disgrace and insult and deprave me, and then go;
so that I longed to drown myself in the pond a thousand times over; but I did
not dare do it. I hadn’t the heart, and now—well, are you ready,
Rogojin?”
</p>

<p>
“Ready—keep your distance, all of you!”
</p>

<p>
“We’re all ready,” said several of his friends. “The
troikas [Sledges drawn by three horses abreast.] are at the door, bells and
all.”
</p>

<p>
Nastasia Philipovna seized the packet of bank-notes.
</p>

<p>
“Gania, I have an idea. I wish to recompense you—why should you
lose all? Rogojin, would he crawl for three roubles as far as the
Vassiliostrof?”
</p>

<p>
“Oh, wouldn’t he just!”
</p>

<p>
“Well, look here, Gania. I wish to look into your heart once more, for
the last time. You’ve worried me for the last three months—now
it’s my turn. Do you see this packet? It contains a hundred thousand
roubles. Now, I’m going to throw it into the fire, here—before all
these witnesses. As soon as the fire catches hold of it, you put your hands
into the fire and pick it out—without gloves, you know. You must have
bare hands, and you must turn your sleeves up. Pull it out, I say, and
it’s all yours. You may burn your fingers a little, of course; but then
it’s a hundred thousand roubles, remember—it won’t take you
long to lay hold of it and snatch it out. I shall so much admire you if you put
your hands into the fire for my money. All here present may be witnesses that
the whole packet of money is yours if you get it out. If you don’t get it
out, it shall burn. I will let no one else come; away—get away, all of
you—it’s my money! Rogojin has bought me with it. Is it my money,
Rogojin?”
</p>

<p>
“Yes, my queen; it’s your own money, my joy.”
</p>

<p>
“Get away then, all of you. I shall do as I like with my
own—don’t meddle! Ferdishenko, make up the fire, quick!”
</p>

<p>
“Nastasia Philipovna, I can’t; my hands won’t obey me,”
said Ferdishenko, astounded and helpless with bewilderment.
</p>

<p>
“Nonsense,” cried Nastasia Philipovna, seizing the poker and raking
a couple of logs together. No sooner did a tongue of flame burst out than she
threw the packet of notes upon it.
</p>

<p>
Everyone gasped; some even crossed themselves.
</p>

<p>
“She’s mad—she’s mad!” was the cry.
</p>

<p>
“Oughtn’t-oughtn’t we to secure her?” asked the general
of Ptitsin, in a whisper; “or shall we send for the authorities? Why,
she’s mad, isn’t she—isn’t she, eh?”
</p>

<p>
“N-no, I hardly think she is actually mad,” whispered Ptitsin, who
was as white as his handkerchief, and trembling like a leaf. He could not take
his eyes off the smouldering packet.
</p>

<p>
“She’s mad surely, isn’t she?” the general appealed to
Totski.
</p>

<p>
“I told you she wasn’t an ordinary woman,” replied the
latter, who was as pale as anyone.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, but, positively, you know—a hundred thousand roubles!”
</p>

<p>
“Goodness gracious! good heavens!” came from all quarters of the
room.
</p>

<p>
All now crowded round the fire and thronged to see what was going on; everyone
lamented and gave vent to exclamations of horror and woe. Some jumped up on
chairs in order to get a better view. Daria Alexeyevna ran into the next room
and whispered excitedly to Katia and Pasha. The beautiful German disappeared
altogether.
</p>

<p>
“My lady! my sovereign!” lamented Lebedeff, falling on his knees
before Nastasia Philipovna, and stretching out his hands towards the fire;
“it’s a hundred thousand roubles, it is indeed, I packed it up
myself, I saw the money! My queen, let me get into the fire after it—say
the word—I’ll put my whole grey head into the fire for it! I have a
poor lame wife and thirteen children. My father died of starvation last week.
Nastasia Philipovna, Nastasia Philipovna!” The wretched little man wept,
and groaned, and crawled towards the fire.
</p>

<p>
“Away, out of the way!” cried Nastasia. “Make room, all of
you! Gania, what are you standing there for? Don’t stand on ceremony. Put
in your hand! There’s your whole happiness smouldering away, look!
Quick!”
</p>

<p>
But Gania had borne too much that day, and especially this evening, and he was
not prepared for this last, quite unexpected trial.
</p>

<p>
The crowd parted on each side of him and he was left face to face with Nastasia
Philipovna, three paces from her. She stood by the fire and waited, with her
intent gaze fixed upon him.
</p>

<p>
Gania stood before her, in his evening clothes, holding his white gloves and
hat in his hand, speechless and motionless, with arms folded and eyes fixed on
the fire.
</p>

<p>
A silly, meaningless smile played on his white, death-like lips. He could not
take his eyes off the smouldering packet; but it appeared that something new
had come to birth in his soul—as though he were vowing to himself that he
would bear this trial. He did not move from his place. In a few seconds it
became evident to all that he did not intend to rescue the money.
</p>

<p>
“Hey! look at it, it’ll burn in another minute or two!” cried
Nastasia Philipovna. “You’ll hang yourself afterwards, you know, if
it does! I’m not joking.”
</p>

<p>
The fire, choked between a couple of smouldering pieces of wood, had died down
for the first few moments after the packet was thrown upon it. But a little
tongue of fire now began to lick the paper from below, and soon, gathering
courage, mounted the sides of the parcel, and crept around it. In another
moment, the whole of it burst into flames, and the exclamations of woe and
horror were redoubled.
</p>

<p>
“Nastasia Philipovna!” lamented Lebedeff again, straining towards
the fireplace; but Rogojin dragged him away, and pushed him to the rear once
more.
</p>

<p>
The whole of Rogojin’s being was concentrated in one rapturous gaze of
ecstasy. He could not take his eyes off Nastasia. He stood drinking her in, as
it were. He was in the seventh heaven of delight.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, what a queen she is!” he ejaculated, every other minute,
throwing out the remark for anyone who liked to catch it. “That’s
the sort of woman for me! Which of you would think of doing a thing like that,
you blackguards, eh?” he yelled. He was hopelessly and wildly beside
himself with ecstasy.
</p>

<p>
The prince watched the whole scene, silent and dejected.
</p>

<p>
“I’ll pull it out with my teeth for one thousand,” said
Ferdishenko.
</p>

<p>
“So would I,” said another, from behind, “with pleasure.
Devil take the thing!” he added, in a tempest of despair, “it will
all be burnt up in a minute—It’s burning, it’s
burning!”
</p>

<p>
“It’s burning, it’s burning!” cried all, thronging
nearer and nearer to the fire in their excitement.
</p>

<p>
“Gania, don’t be a fool! I tell you for the last time.”
</p>

<p>
“Get on, quick!” shrieked Ferdishenko, rushing wildly up to Gania,
and trying to drag him to the fire by the sleeve of his coat. “Get it,
you dummy, it’s burning away fast! Oh—<i>damn</i> the thing!”
</p>

<p>
Gania hurled Ferdishenko from him; then he turned sharp round and made for the
door. But he had not gone a couple of steps when he tottered and fell to the
ground.
</p>

<p>
“He’s fainted!” the cry went round.
</p>

<p>
“And the money’s burning still,” Lebedeff lamented.
</p>

<p>
“Burning for nothing,” shouted others.
</p>

<p>
“Katia-Pasha! Bring him some water!” cried Nastasia Philipovna.
Then she took the tongs and fished out the packet.
</p>

<p>
Nearly the whole of the outer covering was burned away, but it was soon evident
that the contents were hardly touched. The packet had been wrapped in a
threefold covering of newspaper, and the notes were safe. All breathed more
freely.
</p>

<p>
“Some dirty little thousand or so may be touched,” said Lebedeff,
immensely relieved, “but there’s very little harm done, after
all.”
</p>

<p>
“It’s all his—the whole packet is for him, do you
hear—all of you?” cried Nastasia Philipovna, placing the packet by
the side of Gania. “He restrained himself, and didn’t go after it;
so his self-respect is greater than his thirst for money. All
right—he’ll come to directly—he must have the packet or
he’ll cut his throat afterwards. There! He’s coming to himself.
General, Totski, all of you, did you hear me? The money is all Gania’s. I
give it to him, fully conscious of my action, as recompense for—well, for
anything he thinks best. Tell him so. Let it lie here beside him. Off we go,
Rogojin! Goodbye, prince. I have seen a man for the first time in my life.
Goodbye, Afanasy Ivanovitch—and thanks!”
</p>

<p>
The Rogojin gang followed their leader and Nastasia Philipovna to the
entrance-hall, laughing and shouting and whistling.
</p>

<p>
In the hall the servants were waiting, and handed her her fur cloak. Martha,
the cook, ran in from the kitchen. Nastasia kissed them all round.
</p>

<p>
“Are you really throwing us all over, little mother? Where, where are you
going to? And on your birthday, too!” cried the four girls, crying over
her and kissing her hands.
</p>

<p>
“I am going out into the world, Katia; perhaps I shall be a laundress. I
don’t know. No more of Afanasy Ivanovitch, anyhow. Give him my respects.
Don’t think badly of me, girls.”
</p>

<p>
The prince hurried down to the front gate where the party were settling into
the troikas, all the bells tinkling a merry accompaniment the while. The
general caught him up on the stairs:
</p>

<p>
“Prince, prince!” he cried, seizing hold of his arm,
“recollect yourself! Drop her, prince! You see what sort of a woman she
is. I am speaking to you like a father.”
</p>

<p>
The prince glanced at him, but said nothing. He shook himself free, and rushed
on downstairs.
</p>

<p>
The general was just in time to see the prince take the first sledge he could
get, and, giving the order to Ekaterinhof, start off in pursuit of the troikas.
Then the general’s fine grey horse dragged that worthy home, with some
new thoughts, and some new hopes and calculations developing in his brain, and
with the pearls in his pocket, for he had not forgotten to bring them along
with him, being a man of business. Amid his new thoughts and ideas there came,
once or twice, the image of Nastasia Philipovna. The general sighed.
</p>

<p>
“I’m sorry, really sorry,” he muttered. “She’s a
ruined woman. Mad! mad! However, the prince is not for Nastasia Philipovna
now,—perhaps it’s as well.”
</p>

<p>
Two more of Nastasia’s guests, who walked a short distance together,
indulged in high moral sentiments of a similar nature.
</p>

<p>
“Do you know, Totski, this is all very like what they say goes on among
the Japanese?” said Ptitsin. “The offended party there, they say,
marches off to his insulter and says to him, ‘You insulted me, so I have
come to rip myself open before your eyes;’ and with these words he does
actually rip his stomach open before his enemy, and considers, doubtless, that
he is having all possible and necessary satisfaction and revenge. There are
strange characters in the world, sir!”
</p>

<p>
“H’m! and you think there was something of this sort here, do you?
Dear me—a very remarkable comparison, you know! But you must have
observed, my dear Ptitsin, that I did all I possibly could. I could do no more
than I did. And you must admit that there are some rare qualities in this
woman. I felt I could not speak in that Bedlam, or I should have been tempted
to cry out, when she reproached me, that she herself was my best justification.
Such a woman could make anyone forget all reason—everything! Even that
moujik, Rogojin, you saw, brought her a hundred thousand roubles! Of course,
all that happened tonight was ephemeral, fantastic, unseemly—yet it
lacked neither colour nor originality. My God! What might not have been made of
such a character combined with such beauty! Yet in spite of all
efforts—in spite of all education, even—all those gifts are wasted!
She is an uncut diamond.... I have often said so.”
</p>

<p>
And Afanasy Ivanovitch heaved a deep sigh.
</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
